
Read the Introduction and the General Directions at the beginning of
the book and at the beginning of each chapter and subject first, for a
better understanding of the recipes.

    Universal Crust Recipe, page 437.




  The Laurel Health Cookery

  A COLLECTION OF
  Practical Suggestions and Recipes
  For the Preparation of Non-Flesh Foods in Palatable
  and Attractive Ways

  BY
  EVORA BUCKNUM PERKINS

  An Instructor of wide experience in Vegetarian Cookery in Various
  Homes, Chatauquas and Sanitariums, and the Pioneer in
  Hygienic Vegetarian Restaurant Work


  THE LAUREL PUBLISHING COMPANY
  MELROSE, MASS., U. S. A.


Copyright, 1911, by EVORA BUCKNUM PERKINS.




INTRODUCTION


Several years ago as I was leaving Washington after giving a course of
demonstration lectures in hygienic cookery, I was impressed with the
thought that a cook book (which my friends had been urging me to write)
giving the results of my experience, would be the means of reaching the
greatest number of people with knowledge on health subjects.

As a result of that thought, this book comes with earnest, heartfelt
greeting to all other works of the same nature, not as a rival but as a
co-worker in the great plan of glorifying our Creator. 1 Cor. 10:31.

In its preparation, I have purposed to make the book practical,
avoiding technicalities and to some extent conventionalities, and have
endeavored to “meet the people where they are” by not being extreme or
radical; and at the same time to make principles of truth so clear that
many will be won from “the indulgence of appetite, which places them in
such a condition of health that there is a constant warring against the
soul’s highest interests.”

While there are recipes especially for those who entertain, there is an
abundant variety of directions for carefully prepared simple dishes.

The explicit general directions will not be needed by all, but from my
twenty years of experience in teaching, I know that many will value
them.

The foods richest in proteids are classed as “True Meats” and no flesh
meat names are used in the book.

This collection contains the choicest of those of my recipes which have
been published by others in various books and periodicals at different
times.

I am indebted to an innumerable company of people of all classes for
_ideas_, for which I would be glad to thank each one personally if it
were possible.

Though there is hardly any choice, the recipes marked with a star are
especially practical and desirable.

All unnamed quotations are from “The Ministry of Healing” or other
works by the same author.

That “The Laurel Health Cookery” may bring rich blessings to many
households is my earnest prayer.

    Evora Bucknum Perkins

       *       *       *       *       *

“Many will be rescued from physical, mental and moral degeneracy
through the practical influence of health reform. Health talks will be
given, _publications will be multiplied_.

“The principles of health reform will be received with favor; and many
will be enlightened.”

[Illustration]




CONTENTS


                                               PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                    3

  GENERAL                                         9
    Cooking Utensils, their Uses and Care
    Things to Do Beforehand
    Economy
    Miscellaneous
    Measurements
    Flavorings
    Garnishings

  FRUITS                                         34
    Fresh
    Cooked
    To Can
    Jellies
    Jams

  TO CAN VEGETABLES                              69

  TO DRY VEGETABLES                              72

  SOUPS                                          74
    Suggestions
    Water Soups
    Cream and Milk Soups
    Bisques
    Chowders
    Purees
    Our Famous Soups
    Fruit Soups
    Soup Garnishes and Accompaniments

  ENTREES                                       109

  TRUE MEATS                                    139
    Nuts and Nut Foods
    Trumese
    Trumese Dishes
    Nutmese
    Nutmese Dishes
    Trumese and Nutmese Dishes
    Roasts
    Legumes
    Eggs

  MUSHROOMS                                     216

  STUFFINGS AND DRESSINGS                       221

  MEAT AND VEGETABLE GRAVIES AND SAUCES         223

  VEGETABLES                                    237

  CHESTNUTS                                     271

  SALADS                                        273
    Secrets of Success
    Cooked Dressings
    Uncooked Dressings
    True Meat Salads
    Vegetable Salads
    Fruit Salads

  PUDDINGS WITHOUT EGGS                         294

  PUDDINGS WITH EGGS                            309

  PUDDING SAUCES                                324

  GELATINE--VEGETABLE                           335

  PIES                                          347

  CAKES                                         370
    Icings and Fillings

  ICE CREAM AND FRUIT ICES                      402

  CEREALS                                       409

  MACARONI                                      419

  BREADS--LEAVENED                              424

  BREADS--UNLEAVENED, WITHOUT CHEMICALS         445

  SANDWICHES                                    465

  MILK, CREAM, BUTTER AND CHEESE                473

  DRINKS                                        479

  INVALID FOODS                                 486

  CONFECTIONS                                   488

  MEALS AND MENUS                               493

  PICNIC AND TRAVELLING LUNCHES                 504




GENERAL


COOKING UTENSILS, THEIR USES AND CARE

“A good housekeeper without perfected kitchen conveniences is as much
of an anomaly as a carpenter without a plane, a dressmaker without a
sewing machine.”--_Anonym._

What would we think of the farmer who to-day was cutting his hay with
a scythe and reaping his grain with a cradle because he could not
“afford” a reaper and mower?

While we should be able to adapt ourselves to circumstances, to
improvise double boilers, steamers and ovens when necessary, it is at
the same time true economy to have an abundance of cooking utensils if
possible. A half dozen saucepans will last six times as long as one
used for everything and save much valuable time.

“To many people, anything out of the usual custom is deemed
extravagant.” This I suppose accounts for the fact that many housewives
who have beautifully furnished parlors and wear fine clothing cannot
afford conveniences for the kitchen.

The room in which is prepared the “food to sustain life and nourish
brain, bone and muscle,” should be the most attractive place in the
house, and it will be when arranged and furnished for convenience.
I can think of nothing more interesting than a kitchen with the
frequently used utensils decorating the walls where they can be
reached with few steps; and such little things as spoons, egg beaters,
can openers, spatulas, cork screws, potato mashers, measuring cups,
funnels, soup dippers, wire strainers, pinchers and skimmers, not
forgetting a small cushion with pins, hanging just over the table; the
table having drawers for knives, vegetable cutters and other unhangable
articles.

The best quality of aluminum ware is the cheapest and best for fruits
and for general cooking purposes, except for vegetables.

Never put lye or anything alkaline into aluminum vessels.

Copper and re-tinned vessels are unequaled in some respects (if they
may not be used for acid foods); being flat bottomed, thick and heavy,
milk, legumes, cereals and foods of that nature are not so apt to
stick or scorch in them, and they are almost everlasting. They can be
re-tinned when the lining wears off.

Iron kettles and frying pans are excellent for many things. Some of
the uses of a nice smooth iron frying pan are to bake a round cake or
a thick pie or a pudding in, to scallop corn or potatoes, or to scald
milk.

Use granite, agate, and porcelain lined utensils with care.

Never dry them on the stove as that causes them to crack; and do not
knock the edges of the kettles and saucepans with a spoon, nor strike
any kind of a vessel with an agate spoon, as it causes the little
particles of glazing to flake off. These flakes from agate utensils
often work serious injury to the delicate membranes of the digestive
tract.

One large double boiler holding from 8 to 16 qts. is very desirable
as it furnishes two kettles for fruit canning and other purposes and
can be used as a double boiler when required. Several smaller ones of
different sizes economize time and food material.

To improvise a double boiler, set a close covered pan over a kettle
of boiling water; or set a covered dish into a pail with water in it,
cover and put into the oven; or put a pan or other covered vessel into
a kettle of water on top of the stove with something under it to keep
it from the bottom of the kettle; or set one milk crock into another,
with water in the lower one; or a bowl into the top of the teakettle.
The first double boiler I ever owned was a gluepot.

Use wire strainers or small and large colanders, well covered, over
dishes of boiling water, for steamers; and when a deeper receptacle is
required, turn a basin or pan that just fits, over the top.

Two sizes of flat colanders with pin head holes are to be found at the
5 and 10 cent stores, which are just as useful and durable as more
expensive ones. They answer the purpose of both steamer and colander.

Be sure to have deep kettles or boilers into which the colanders fit
perfectly. I have been in kitchens where, though there was a sufficient
variety of utensils, they were of little use, for no two things fitted;
the steamers and colanders were just a little too large or a little too
small for all the kettles, requiring double the expenditure of time and
strength in using.

Iron rings from small wooden kegs or little rings melted from the tops
of tin cans are great treasures to use on the top of the stove, in
kettles, or in the oven, to set vessels on to keep the contents from
sticking and burning.

“Gunboats”--empty tin cans--of all sizes, have a great variety of uses.

A book of asbestos sheets costing ten cents is invaluable. Each sheet
can be used again and again for laying over bread, cake and other foods
in the oven.

After using an aluminum frying or omelet pan for a time, one would
always feel it to be a necessity.

The uses of timbale molds and custard cups are almost innumerable, and
when you once get them you have them.

A pastry brush saves greasy fingers and much time, in oiling cold or
warm pans. Never use it on a _hot_ griddle.

For dispatch and thoroughness in oiling round bottomed gem pans,
nothing equals a piece of cloth folded in several thicknesses 2½ to 3
in. square, saturated with oil.

A spatula (similar to a palette knife) of medium size will soon pay for
itself in the material it saves from the sides of the pans, as well as
in time.

A large French knife chops vegetables on a board more rapidly than they
can be done in a chopping bowl; it also slices onions, shaves cabbage,
cuts croutons and does many things as no other knife can, while smaller
ones of different sizes all have their uses.

For stirring dry flour and meal into hot liquid, for gravies, and for
beating all batters, nothing can take the place of a strong wire batter
whip.

The “Surprise” beater with fine cross wires makes the whites of eggs
for meringues and cakes lighter than any other. The smaller the wire
around the edge, the lighter the eggs will be. These very delicate ones
are for sale in some of the five and ten cent stores at 3 for 5c. Next
to the “Surprise” beater for beating whites of eggs comes the silver
fork.

The “Dover” revolving beater gives a fine close grain when that is
desired, as in egg creams, the “Holt” coming next and being more rapid
in its work, while the “Lyon” gives a fine, fluffy result. A large
sized beater is more useful.

Eggs can be beaten in a deep bowl, narrow at the bottom (the regular
cooking bowl shape) in half the time that it takes to beat them in
a broad bottomed bowl. The nearer the sides of the bowl are to the
beater, the quicker the work will be done. The same is true of whipping
cream, and as cream spatters at first, a pitcher or a tin can, not so
deep but the handle of the beater can be operated, is best for the
purpose. It is better to set the dish in the sink while whipping cream.

If possible have a good scale, as much more accurate results are
obtained in cooking by weight than by measure. It will be useful in
weighing articles from the grocery and market, for weighing letters and
papers for mailing and many other things.

When you have used a good bread mixer for a time, you would not go
back to the old, laborious way of kneading bread for double its cost.
The mixer also makes better bread than can be made by hand.

[Illustration: SOME COOKING CONVENIENCES]

[Illustration:

    PUDDING MOLDS
    COPPER SAUCE PAN
    TURK’S HEAD MOLD
    BORDER MOLD
    ALUMINUM OMELET PAN
    SURPRISE BEATER]

One of the greatest labor savers is a food cutter. A large sized one,
even for a small family, is most satisfactory. Many now have a nut
butter attachment which is desirable, though a regular nut butter mill
is preferable for nut preparations.

Try to have something for a quick fire. If you are out of the reach of
gas, a well-cared-for two burner oil stove will do good service.

Eternal vigilance is the price of preventing double boilers from going
dry. Add more water before there is the least danger.

Rinse off the egg beater or batter whip and hang it in its place as
soon as you finish using it, before going on with what you are doing,
unless, as in some cakes, it needs to drain, then have ready a pitcher,
tin can or quart measure containing cold water to drop it into after
draining.

The cogs of an egg beater should never be wet; when they are wet once,
its usefulness is impaired.

The “Surprise” beater should never be touched with a cloth.

Always wipe a can opener after using, and hang it in its place.

Wire strainers should always be rinsed as soon as used; colanders also,
unless they require soaking, in which case put them immediately into
water.

Put sticky utensils to soaking as soon as emptied.

Rinse and put to draining everything that can be rinsed; then it will
be ready for use instead of rusting in the sink.

Never put knives, spatulas, egg beaters or whips in the sink; always
rinse them off at once.

Professional cooks never lay a knife down without wiping it off. Clean,
dry cloths or towels should be at hand for such purposes.

A side towel fastened to the waist is almost a necessity.

Never scrape a knife or spoon on the edge of a dish.

It is just as necessary and as satisfactory to keep the inside of the
oven blackened as the top of the stove, and it is very little more work.

Boil strong lye water in a scorched vessel (except aluminum), before
trying to clean it.

I have noticed that if a little water is boiled for a few minutes in
a close covered vessel in which some pasty food has been cooked, the
particles are so loosened by the steam that the vessel washes easily.

I would suggest that instead of hanging the dish cloth on the inside
of the sink door, you put it on a line near the stove or out of doors,
where it will dry quickly.

Wet wooden spoons, chopping bowls and all wooden utensils in cold water
before using, to prevent their absorbing the flavors and juices of
foods.

Put new bread and cake tins into a hot oven and bake them until they
look like old ones, if you wish your bread and cake to be well done on
the bottom and sides.

Do not work in a “mess,” keep your tables wiped up as you go.

Above all, _pick up after yourself_. It is often more work to pick up
after people than to do the work.


THINGS TO DO BEFOREHAND

Wash potatoes and keep in stone crock in cool place.

Have beans, peas and lentils looked over.

Have English currants washed and dried, in jars.

Have seeded raisins stemmed.

Have peanuts and almonds blanched.

Have herbs and flavorings ground and bottled.

Have citron cut, wrapped in waxed paper, in covered jar.

Have flour browned in three shades.

Have dry bread ground.

Have tomatoes strained.

Have lemon juice extracted, standing in a cool place.


ECONOMY

“Gather up the fragments that remain that nothing be lost.” John 6:13.

_True economy consists in using all of a good material, rather than in
buying an inferior quality._

It is poor economy from a financial standpoint (saying nothing of
health) to buy small or specked fruits or vegetables.

It takes longer to pare, quarter and core a specked apple than a sound
one, because the decayed part has first to be cut out and one may have
to cut again and again before it is all removed and when it is finished
there may not remain a quarter of an apple.

I once saw two barrels of apples bought at a great “bargain.” Four or
five people whose time was valuable spent an afternoon in preparing
those apples to stew; when they had finished, there was just a bushel
left and they were so flavorless that it was necessary to add lemon
juice and a good deal of sugar to make them at all palatable.

C. F. Langworthy, Ph. D. in speaking of overripe and partially decayed
fruit says: “In addition to a deterioration in flavor, there is always
the possibility of digestive disturbance if such fruit is eaten
raw.”--_Farmers’ Bulletin 293. U. S. Department of Agriculture._

Inferior, immature fruit, dried, requires a larger proportion of sugar
than well ripened fruit, and then it is neither palatable nor wholesome.

Small prunes with their large proportion of stone and skin are
expensive besides being inferior in flavor.

It takes as long to pare, quarter and core a small apple as a large
one, and a bushel of large apples will yield more pulp than a bushel of
small ones, notwithstanding the spaces, there being a so much larger
proportion of skins and cores in the small ones.

Small pineapples are especially expensive.

“Cheap” flour costs more than the best because it takes a larger
quantity to make the same amount of bread.

Corn starch that costs two or three cents less per package than the
best will sometimes require double the quantity for thickening, besides
imparting a strong, disagreeable flavor.

Cotton seed oil that is not well refined, so that it is clear and
nearly white is not fit for food, and requires more for shortening.

Economy in all things, food, clothing, houses, climate is that which
keeps us in the best condition physically and spiritually.


MISCELLANEOUS

All foods that are suitable should be used uncooked. They are more
nourishing and consequently more satisfying.

Foods containing starch should not be eaten raw.

Next to wholesomeness, make taste and palatability first. There is
nothing more disappointing than to taste of a daintily arranged and
decorated dish and find it flat and insipid.

Seek to develop the natural flavors of foods, of which there are
thousands, rather than to add foreign flavorings.

To stir fruits, legumes and many foods while cooking is just the way to
make them stick and scorch. Shake the vessels instead of stirring.

To brush kettles and saucepans on the inside with oil, helps to keep
milk and other foods from sticking.

Use double boilers as far as possible for reheating gravies, cereals
and legumes, and for heating milk.

When, in spite of all precautions, something burns on, plunge the
vessel without ceremony into a pail or pan of cold water for a moment,
empty the contents immediately into another kettle, add boiling water
and return to the fire to finish cooking. Badly scorched foods often
lose all the scorched flavor by this treatment.

Remove the burnt portion from bread or cake with a grater, when first
taken from the oven.

Dip the knife into hot water to cut butter, warm bread or cake.

Two forks are better than a knife for separating steamed puddings,
fresh cake and many things.

Use pastry flour for gravies, sauces and all thickenings.

To blend flour and liquid for thickening, add only a little liquid at
a time, stirring with a fork or batter whip until a perfectly smooth
paste is formed, then add liquid to make of the consistency of rather
thin cream.

Flour, for thickening, gives a more creamy consistency than corn
starch. Use corn starch for fruit juices, as it leaves them clearer.

Never mix flour or corn starch with eggs to stir into boiling
liquid, as they both require longer cooking than eggs will bear
without separating. Stir the blended flour or corn starch into the
liquid first, let it boil well, then pour the hot mixture gradually,
stirring, into the beaten eggs, return to the fire and cook a moment if
necessary, but do not boil.

In adding yolks of eggs to hot mixtures, put two or three spoonfuls of
the mixture on to the yolks, stirring, then add them, all at once, to
the whole.

Eggs must be added all at once to hot liquids so they will all be
cooked alike and a part will not curdle before the rest is done.

To prevent a raw taste, blended flour should be added to boiling liquid
so slowly as not to stop its boiling.

“Rich milk” means one-fourth to one-third cream.

Cream judiciously used is no more expensive from a financial stand
point than butter, and from a health standpoint it is cheaper.

Being in the form of an emulsion, cream does not hinder digestion as
does the free fat of butter. It should be sterilized before using in
uncooked dishes.

In the recipes in this book, heavy cream is meant unless thin is
specified.

It is cheaper to buy heavy cream than light, when there are two
qualities, and you can make it as thin as you wish.

When cream is scarce do not use it where oil and skimmed milk will do
just as well, but save it for uses where nothing else will take its
place.

Cream with water often gives a better flavor to foods than milk, and is
just as cheap.

For farmers, the use of cream saves the labor of making butter.

When taking cream, use fewer nuts and less butter and other oils.

Nut creams and butters may always be substituted for dairy cream and
butter, with judgment as to flavors.

Peanut butter should be used sparingly and judiciously. No one enjoys,
as one man expressed it, “that everlasting peanut flavor in everything.”

Oil and melted butter may be combined in equal quantities when the
butter flavor is desirable, as in pilau and drawn butter.

Oil makes more tender pastry, raised cakes and universal crust.

“Stale” bread crumbs are those of a two or three days old loaf.

Stale bread is understood for crumbs when no specification is given.

A quick and easy way to prepare stale bread crumbs is to cut very thin
slices from the loaf, lay them together and cut as thin as possible
across one way and then the other with a large sharp knife into tiny
dice.

“Dry” crumbs are those from a loaf dry enough to grate or grind.

Save all pieces of bread not usable for croutons or other things, dry
without browning, and roll or grind, for dry crumbs; sift, leaving two
sizes of crumbs.

When bread crumbs are used for puddings or molds the quantity will vary
with the kind of bread. Fewer will be required with home-made bread
than with baker’s bread.

Bread, cracker or zwieback crumbs, corn meal, flour or browned flour
No. 1, or a mixture of crumbs and brown or white flour may be used for
rolling croquettes or cutlets, or for sprinkling the top of scallops or
gratins.

Nut meal is suitable for the outside of rice croquettes and the top of
many dishes.

Grated or chopped onion is apt to become bitter if prepared long before
using.

To extract the juice from lemons without a drill, cut them in halves
without rolling, the same as for a drill, then holding each half over a
strainer in a bowl, work the point of a spoon from the cut surface in
and around gradually to the rind. This method removes the juice cleaner
than does the drill.

Another way is to roll the lemon and puncture it at one end with a
silver fork, then squeeze the juice out. This leaves the seeds inside.

Dry lemons yield more juice than fresh ones.

Remove the pulp from lemons for pies and other uses by cutting them
lengthwise in the middle of the sections and scraping each side of the
membrane, or by cutting the lemon in halves crosswise and taking the
pulp out with a spoon.

To keep lemons and oranges from molding, spread them on a shelf in a
dry place so that they will not touch each other. They may be covered
with glass tumblers if in a cool as well as dry place.

To core apples, insert a steel fork at the blossom end and turn it
round and round, then repeat from the stem end.

The half shell of an egg will remove bits of shell from broken eggs
much better than a spoon.

My mother taught me to use too little rather than too much salt in
foods, saying it was easier to add it than to take it out.

Salt varies so much in saltness that it is impossible to give definite
rules for its use.

Have a shelf over the stove for zwieback, crackers and toasted cereals
to keep them crisp.

Keep a dish of oil on or near your work table.

Have a small tin of pastry flour on the table to use for thickening
sauces; also a small bowl or tin of sugar, and one of corn starch if
using it frequently, and a box of salt, of course.

If a thickened mixture is allowed to any more than boil up well, after
lemon juice is added, it will become thin.

Finely-sliced, tender, raw celery is much to be preferred to cooked, in
timbales, croquettes, batters and sauces.

Never chop celery; slice it fine instead.

The word “meat” as used in this book refers to true meats, not flesh
meats, but is confined to such foods as are rich in proteids, not being
taken in its broadest sense.

Use soft butter for oiling molds to be decorated, as that holds the
decorations better than oil.

To unmold, dip the mold in hot water a moment.

Both oil and crumb molds for delicate fillings.

Dip molds in cold water, invert and turn quickly right side up without
draining, for gelatine and other fillings to be served cold.

Many foods gain in richness of flavor by being reheated; and for that
reason, left overs often make more appetizing dishes than fresh cooked
foods.

Reheat foods, legumes, vegetables, cereals, or fruits, to preserve
them, before they begin to show signs of spoiling.

Only a small quantity of sugar, proportionately, should be added to
yolks of eggs, or they will gather in small, hard particles and become
useless.

Ice water crisps and freshens such vegetables as lettuce, parsley,
cabbage and cucumbers as that just a little warmer will not.

In multiplying a recipe to make a larger quantity of soup or other
liquid food, use a smaller proportion of liquid; or in dishes
containing thickening take a larger proportion of flour, as the
evaporation is not so great in proportion to the quantity.

The alcohol of yeast or of flavoring extracts goes off in the steam in
cooking.

When eggs are used in cakes, breads, puddings or other dishes, fewer
nuts, nut foods, legumes or other proteid foods will be required.

Bake soufflés and dishes made light with eggs, slowly, as when baked
rapidly they puff up quickly and fall just as quickly; while if baked
slowly, they retain their lightness.

Timbales, puddings and all molds to be served hot should stand 5 or 10
m. in a warm place after removing from the fire, before unmolding.

Place a cold wet towel over pudding molds to loosen, if inclined to
stick.

Do not chop nut meats fine for roasts, cakes or puddings. Sometimes
leave them whole, or just break them a little.

To try vegetables for tenderness, use a sharp pointed knife rather than
a fork.

Batter and plum puddings and brown bread may be steamed in the oven by
setting the mold containing them into a vessel of water with a tight
fitting cover.

To steam in glass, set dishes or jars first into cold water and bring
to boiling, then set into steamer.

Honey attracts moisture, consequently it should be kept in a warm dry
place.

In discarding unwholesome foods be sure to put something wholesome in
their place; in other words, employ a system of substitution rather
than one of subtraction.

For instance, for this book we have taken pains to search out a
variety of harmless flavorings to be used in place of the irritating
condiments, such as mustard, pepper, ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg and
cloves; and instead of the acetic acid of vinegar, we use lemon
juice--citric acid.

“Vinegar--acetic acid, is about ten times as strong as alcohol and
makes more trouble in the stomach than any of the other acids except
oxalic.”--_Dr. Rand._

“Do not eat largely of salt.”

“Very hot food ought not to be taken into the stomach. Soups, puddings
and other articles of the kind are often eaten too hot, and as a
consequence the stomach is debilitated.”

Many people can digest cream better when accompanied by an acid fruit.

While using oil enough to keep the machinery of the body lubricated,
take care not to use too much. People with dilated stomachs can take
very little, and that little best in salad dressings or as shortening
with flour.

Malt gives flesh but not strength; too much is harmful.

Flesh is more often a sign of disease than of health. Good solid firm
muscle is to be cultivated.

Taste is a matter of education. Let us educate ourselves to like the
things that are good for us.

“Perseverance in a self-denying course of eating and drinking will soon
make plain, wholesome food palatable, and it will be eaten with greater
satisfaction than the epicure enjoys over his rich dainties.”


MEASUREMENTS

Flour is always sifted once before measuring and is laid into the
measure lightly with a spoon to just level, without being shaken down;
when measured otherwise, results will not be correct.

The measurements of tablespoons and teaspoons in this book are for
slightly rounded spoons, as granulated sugar would be when the spoon is
shaken sidewise. This seems the natural way of measuring. When level
spoons are specified, the spoon is leveled off with a spatula or the
straight edge of a knife.

The half-pint cup is the standard measuring cup.

A cupful is all the cup will hold without running over.

  A speck                              equals ¼ saltspn.
  1 saltspn                              „    ¼ teaspn.
  2 teaspns                              „    1 dessert spn.
  1½ dessert spn                         „    1 tablespn.
  3 teaspns                              „    1 tablespn.
  1 tablespn. sugar or corn starch       „    1½ level tablespn.
  3 level tablespns. cracker crumbs      „    ¼ cup.
  9½ tablespns. granulated sugar         „    1 cup.
  15¼ level tablespns. „     „           „    1 cup.
  3 tablespns. liquid                    „    ¼ cup.
  4 tablespns. liquid                    „    ⅓ cup.
  4½ level tablespns. butter             „    ⅓ cup.
  3 rounded tablespns. butter            „    ⅓ cup.
  12 tablespns. liquid                   „    1 cup.
  1 wine glass                           „    ¼ cup.
  1 gill                                 „    ½ cup.
  1 cup                                  „    ½ pint.
  1 tumbler                              „    ½ pint.
  4 gills--2 cups                        „    1 pint.
  2 pints                                „    1 quart.
  4 quarts                               „    1 gallon.
  2 cups (1 pint) granulated sugar       „    1 pound.
  2½ cups powdered sugar                 „    1 pound.
  3⅔ cups light or medium brown sugar    „    1 pound
  2 cups butter                          „    1 pound
  4 cups good pastry flour               „    1 pound
  3½-3⅞ cups good bread flour            „    1 pound
  3½ plus, cups rice                     „    1 pound
  3 cups seeded raisins                  „    1 pound
  3¼ cups currants                       „    1 pound
  4 cups desiccated cocoanut             „    1 pound
  1 pint milk or water                   „    1 pound
  1 rounded tablespn. butter             „    1 ounce
  Butter size of a walnut                „    1 ounce
  Butter size of an egg                  „    2 ounces
  2 tablespns. oil                       „    1⅛ ounce
  1 cup of oil                           „    6¾ ounces
  2 rounded tablespns. flour             „    1 ounce
  1 rounded tablespn. sugar              „    1 ounce
  1½ level tablespn. table salt          „    1 ounce
  8 eggs in shell                        „    1 pound
  10 eggs out of shell                   „    1 pound
  12 ears of corn                        „    3 cups grated corn
  1 ear of corn                          „    ¼ cup grated corn
  18 roots of oyster plant               „    1¼ qt. sliced
  1 bunch of oyster plant                „    ⅔ qt. sliced
  1 bunch of oyster plant                „    1 pt. after cooking


FLAVORINGS

If we heed the injunction of the wise man to eat for strength and not
for drunkenness, we will exclude the burning, irritating condiments
from our dietary, since they by causing a feverish state of the system
and creating “a thirst which water cannot quench,” are among the
greatest causes of inebriety.

When our sense of taste is not benumbed or destroyed by harmful
accompaniments we are in a condition to keenly enjoy the thousands of
fine, delicate flavors that our loving Father has placed in wholesome
foods.

Among the stronger flavors for those who do not at once enjoy the
delicate ones, we have sage, savory, thyme, marjoram, rosemary, bay
leaf, garlic, onion, chives and leeks.

Then come celery salt and seed, leaves and stalks; lemon thyme,
shallots, spearmint, parsley, basil and tarragon.

The flavors of carrots, turnips, cabbage and spinach have their place.

The small leaf buds of sassafras may be dried and ground for soups and
stews.

Celery leaves dried with gentle heat make excellent flavorings. They
may be powdered by rubbing through a wire strainer the same as leaf
sage.

Crush stalks of celery and let them stand in the soup or sauce to be
flavored for 15 m., then remove them.

For a fresh positive onion flavor, let slices of onion stand in the
food for 5 or 10 m.

The flavor of garlic is usually obtained by rubbing the dish in which
the food is to be served or the spoon with which it is stirred with the
cut surface of one of the cloves or sections. Slice it and crush it
with salt when using it in cooked foods. One clove will flavor a large
quantity.

Use bay leaf in the proportion of one large leaf to a quart of liquid.

As far as possible raise your own herbs. If in no other way, plant them
in pots and boxes in the house. Somewhere I have seen the suggestion of
planting parsley in holes in the sides of a barrel which has been sawed
in two, and such plants as sage, thyme, mint, basil and tarragon in the
top.

Gather herbs before flowering, dry in the shade, tie in paper sacks and
hang in a dry place. Powder only a small quantity at a time and keep in
close covered small jars. Fresh herbs, especially mint and tarragon,
when obtainable, are far superior to dry ones.

The fact that raising any oil to a temperature high enough to brown it,
decomposes it and produces a poisonous acid--a powerful irritant--is
one of the best known to science.

Flour is rendered more digestible by browning and when combined with
cream, oil or butter, gives the browned oil flavor without the poison.

To prepare browned flour, sift _bread_ flour into a broad flat pan, let
it stand in a warm oven, stirring occasionally, until thoroughly dry,
then gradually increase the heat of the oven, stirring often, until the
desired degree of brownness is reached.

A delicate cream color, so light that you would hardly know there was
any color except by comparing it with flour that had not been in the
oven, gives a delightfully meaty flavor to some gravies and sauces. A
light or medium brown is convenient to have at times, but the one most
useful is the dark chestnut brown. The darker it is the longer it will
last, as less of it will be required for flavoring.

To obtain this color a very high degree of heat will be required at the
last, with almost constant stirring. As this dark flour lasts so long
(I seldom make it more than once in a year for a large family), it pays
to give it the necessary attention at every stage. Do not try to hurry
it. If you begin browning it before it is thoroughly dry, it will burn.
When done, sift and keep in close covered can or jar.

The lightest shade (which for convenience we call No. 1, and the
others No. 2 and 3) should be prepared oftener as it becomes stale by
standing. No. 3 will keep indefinitely. It is used for flavoring only
as it will not thicken. Where consistency is desired, combine it with
unbrowned flour. No. 1 will thicken nearly as much as though it had not
been in the oven, and No. 2 a little.

When no number is given in recipes calling for browned flour, No. 3 is
understood.

Browned flour, onion and a small quantity of tomato (not enough to
give a tomato taste) combined, form the basis of meaty flavors in foods.

To these, add sometimes a bay leaf, a very little sage and a trifle of
thyme. Again, add bay leaf, grated or chopped carrot and a very few
celery tops, dried or fresh.

Garlic combines well with either of these combinations, and powdered or
soaked dried mushrooms are a delightful addition.

Butter (oil or part oil) and a little onion with parsley seem something
like chicken.

Juniper berries are thought to give the flavor of game. Not more than a
teaspoonful of crushed berries should be used to the quart of stew.

Combine flavors so that no one is prominent but the whole combination
pleasing.

Use herbs and all strong flavorings sparingly. One colored cook of
experience expressed it when she said, “I put in just a trifle of sage,
not enough to make it vulgar.”

Withal, have a variety; do not use the same flavors day after day.

=Brown Onion Flavor=

For sauces, soups and croquettes.

Cook together sliced onions, browned flour and oil with salt and water
until onions are tender; strain, keep in cool place.


FOR SWEETS

Steep peach leaves in water for almond flavor.

Finely-ground coriander seed is a delightful and not unwholesome
flavoring. It is cheaper to buy the seed by the pound. A half pound
will go a long way. Do not grind too much at a time.

Ground anise seed in minute quantities is unequaled for some things,
but is disagreeable when used too liberally.

For sweet dishes to be flavored with lemon or orange, score the rind of
the fruit lightly with a sharp-tined fork. Drop the scored fruit into
the measured sugar and rub it well with the sugar.

Another way of obtaining the flavor, also of grape fruit, is to pour
boiling water over the thinly-pared yellow rind and when cold, strain.
For salads, let that thin rind stand in the lemon or other fruit juices
for a time and then remove.

When obliged to use lemon or orange extracts, use only a few drops
instead of the teaspoonful of the average recipe.

Rose is another of the delightful flavors to be used sparingly.

To flavor with cocoanut, when the fibre is not desired, steep (do not
boil) the cocoanut in milk for 15-20 m., then strain it out.


SALAD FLAVORINGS

To flavor lemon juice for cooked or uncooked dressings, take to each
three tablespns. of lemon juice and one of water, a slice of onion, a
bay leaf, and ¼ teaspn. of celery seed or 1 tablespn. of chopped celery
leaves. Boil a moment, then cool and strain. Tarragon and chives may
be used for the flavorings. Onion, bay leaf, thyme, a trifle of garlic
if liked, and a few thin yellow-slices of orange peel make another
combination.

The salad dish is sometimes rubbed with the cut surface of a clove of
garlic or a slice of onion, or onion may be chopped or grated. Crushed
celery seed is liked by some in salad dressings. Spearmint is very
refreshing. Delicate tender sassafras leaves may be used in fruit and
nut meat salads.

Shredded fresh mint combines well with orange or grape fruit or with
currant juice; tarragon with red raspberries and currants, and basil
with peaches.

In closing the subject of flavorings, I quote the words of a lady
visitor after sampling some of the dishes prepared by a class in
cookery:

“Any one can give a taste to foods by adding condiments and flavorings,
but to develop the flavors of the foods themselves is an art.”


GARNISHING

The saying that “some people eat with their eyes” is true to a great
extent of all of us. I believe that the veriest savage would better
enjoy his dinner, however rude, if somewhere there were tucked into it
a bit of green. The busy farmer’s wife as she goes to the wood pile for
an armful of wood can quickly pick off a spray of May weed, dropping it
into a tin of cold water as she passes the water pail, and her platter
of beans for dinner is transformed, in the eyes of those children, into
a thing of beauty, and what effect may it not have in the formation of
their characters?

Of variety in garnishing there need be no lack with the garden, wayside
and woods abounding in beautiful leaves, vines and flowers.

There are foliage plant, geranium, and autumn leaves, ferns in variety,
with lettuce, endive, spinach, parsley, chervil and carrot tops. The
variegated variety of beet leaves, as also the bright blossoms of
nasturtiums make a brilliant garnish.

Put parsley, ferns, and all of the green leaves and vines into very
cold water as soon as gathered and leave for some time, then keep in
paper sacks in a cold place away from the wind. Repeat the cold water
bath at intervals.

Barberries canned, or preserved in brine, candied cranberries or
cherries, green grapes in brine, designs cut from orange, lemon grape
fruit and tangerine rinds, tomatoes in slices or in lengthwise pieces,
and slices of lemon or orange with the skin on are all suitable
garnishes at times.

Lemon cups, having a slice cut off from the ends so that they will
stand, may be used for mayonnaise or small servings of salad.

Orange and grape fruit halves with tops notched or scalloped or
sometimes cut in deep points rolled down, and orange baskets make a
change of service. All of these fruit cups should be kept in ice water
or chopped ice until serving time, then thoroughly dried with a soft
towel.

Blood oranges and gelatine oranges are novelties for garnishing.

Sprays of maidenhair fern are pretty under grape fruit and orange cups.

All cups or glasses containing salads or creams should be served on
doilies on small plates.

To prepare fringed celery, cut the stalks into two- or three-in.
lengths, then slice very fine from each end to within ¾-1 in. of the
center and leave in ice water for a time. Do not lay in ice water
before preparing. The short tender stalks may have the leaves left on
and be shredded at the opposite end. Celery _leaves_ make a desirable
garnish.

Cut carrots, beets and yellow turnips into slices or sticks, or into
round pieces with an open-top thimble or a round pastry tube, and into
fancy shapes with vegetable cutters, selecting cutters which have not
sharp points or slender stems.

=Radish Lilies=

Get either the turnip or olive shaped radishes, wash them well, trim
off just the slender tips and all but one or two of the smallest
leaves. With a thin, sharp knife cut them into halves from the tip end
almost to the stem, and the same way into quarters and eighths. Then
carefully loosen the rind of each section as far down as it is cut and
throw the radishes into ice water, leaving them there for several hours
or overnight, when they will have bloomed into beautiful lilies. Pure
white or yellow lilies may be made from yellow or white radishes. Serve
directly from the ice water, and the radishes will be crisp and sweet
and easily digested.

Just one radish sometimes, in a spray or two of parsley or chervil is
better than a more elaborate garnish; a red radish sliced or cut into
quarters or sixths is pretty in a little green.

Roll up imperfect leaves of lettuce and slice in thin slices, then pick
up lightly and use for borders or nests or beds.

Dry parsley thoroughly in a towel before chopping. For rolling, spread
the particles out, a little distance apart, so as to just fleck
whatever is rolled in it.

Use nuts chopped or in halves or broken pieces for borders or nests of
fruit or vegetable salads; never put them into the dressing.

=Potato Balls=

Potatoes may be cut into balls with a vegetable scoop, boiled until
just tender, not broken, drained, sprinkled with chopped parsley and
used for garnishing a true meat dish.

=Egg Daisies=

Cut the hard boiled yolks of eggs into round pieces and the whites into
petal shapes for daisies for decorating the tops of small spinach or
other timbales or molds.

The whites and yolks are better poached separately for garnishing. Cut
whites with vegetable cutters sometimes.

=Oxeye Daisies=

Use the end of a small black olive for the center of daisies, and
carrots for the leaves.

Toast points or croutons of different shapes are suitable garnishes for
timbales, eggs, broiled mushrooms and true meat or vegetable stews, or
we may use pieces of bread of different shapes that have been dipped in
egg yolks and milk and baked. Breaded triangles, squares or circles, of
corn meal porridge may be used to garnish the edge of a platter for a
stew.

Serve some creamed dishes or stews in shells of pastry.

Turk’s head and border molds may be decorated with truffles or other
decorations, and used for meat dishes for variety.

Button mushrooms may be used for garnishing individual timbales.

Cut left overs of pie crust or cracker dough into fancy shapes, for
scalloped dishes, salads and some desserts, and into squares, diamonds
or strips for peas and other vegetables.

For legumes or other meat dishes, sometimes use carrots in dice or
slices, sprinkled with chopped parsley or interspersed with sprigs of
parsley.

Lemon Points.--Cut slices of lemon into four or six parts.

=Pastry Bag=

The pastry bag gives variety in garnishing and decorating. The bag
itself may be of rubber, paper or cloth. Cloth for all purposes is the
most practical. To make, take “Indian Head” or other heavy cloth, cut
it into any sized square desired; fold and sew together in cornucopia
shape (the seam is better felled), trim the top evenly and hem; then
cut off a very little from the point and hem that, leaving the opening
just large enough to insert the tubes one-third to one-half their
length.

Paper bags may be used in an emergency, and rubber for some purposes,
but not for anything containing oil.

Mashed peas and potatoes should not be too dry for decorating.

Mayonnaise dressing and whipped cream should be stiff, as also
meringues.


COLORINGS

=Pokeberry--Carmine=

Cover berries with water, boil till the skins break, strain, add 1 cup
of sugar to each pint of juice; boil, bottle, seal.

_For Red_, cook strained tomato to a thick pulp; or slice a bright red
raw beet into cold water and let it stand on the stove where it will
heat slowly to a little below the boiling point and strain.

_For Green_, bruise parsley, spinach, chervil, onion tops, chives,
tarragon or lettuce, with or without lemon, and press out the juice for
coloring.

_For Yellow_, steep saffron in boiling water for ½-1 hour and strain
when cold.

When these colorings are not suitable, the so-called “fruit colors” for
sale at the groceries may be used. Use only enough for delicate shades.


ARRANGEMENT AND GARNISHING OF SALADS

The arrangement and garnishing of salads depends largely upon
individual taste and skill in the use of things at hand, and is a
matter of importance.

The garnish should be a suitable one and should harmonize with the
ingredients of the salad. For example, a dainty flower or vine with a
delicate fruit salad, and slices or fancy shapes of vegetables with
true meat salads.

Red apple, or tomato cups may be used for light colored salads, and
yellow tomato, or green and white apple cups for bright ones.

Juicy fruit salads should be served in dainty glasses or cups; and a
correspondingly dainty doily on the plate underneath the glass with a
delicate flower or leaf by its side, leaves nothing to be desired.

       *       *       *       *       *

“We do not attain perfection by striving to do something out of the
common.

“Perfection is acquired by doing the common things uncommonly
well.”--_Mowry._




FRUITS


FRUITS--FRESH

“Man has always thrived as he has eaten freely of fruits.”--_H. Irving
Hancock._

“The best food on this planet is ripe fruit. The healthiest people
on the globe are the fruit eaters of tropical countries. The great
muscular Maoris of New Zealand are a frugiverous race. I have seen a
boat crew of these great chocolate colored giants that would outrow the
‘crack’ university crews were they properly trained. The bread fruit
of the Samoan Islands has made a race of giants. I have examined these
men and women on their native soil and finer human specimens never
lived.”--_Dr. Paul Edwards._

“The more we depend upon the fresh fruit just as it is plucked from the
tree, the greater will be the blessing.”

“It would be well for us to do less cooking and to eat more fruit in
its natural state. Eat freely of fresh grapes, apples, peaches, pears,
berries and all other kinds of fruit that can be obtained.”

Fruits supply sugar, acids, mineral matter and bulk. The mineral
elements of fruits are more readily assimilated than those of flesh
meat and vegetables. Acid fruits aid in the digestion of nuts and
other nitrogenous foods. Acid, juicy fruits keep the system clean and
free from germs. They render lime and soda salts soluble, enabling the
system to throw them off. They _allay_ instead of _creating_ thirst.
Alcohol and tobacco cannot stay long with the individual who uses no
flesh foods and partakes freely of ripe juicy fruits. Use more fruit
and fewer vegetables if you would not experience thirst.

Cane sugar is not digested in the stomach but causes fermentation by
hindering the digestion of other foods. The sugar of fruits (grape
and fruit sugar, so-called), and that of honey are all ready for
assimilation, so require less labor on the part of the body and may be
used more rapidly for the repair of muscular fatigue.

The laxative effect of fruit is very important. Very ripe bananas taken
when the stomach is empty often produce immediate effect. Pineapples
after nitrogenous foods, ripe olives, peaches, pears and nearly all
fruits are helpful.

It is better to use the juice and pulp only, of seedy fruits like
blackberries and black raspberries. With many people the seeds produce
hives.

The matter of bulk in the diet is an important one. The whole digestive
tract suffers if there is not a fairly good bulk of food to be handled
by it, yet serious results follow when a large quantity of concentrated
food is consumed; consequently, fruits and green vegetables being
composed largely of water supply just what is needed.

Fruit must be thoroughly ripened, sound and well matured. Many unripe
fruits contain raw starch which causes trouble when they are eaten.

The largest fruit of its kind is usually the cheapest. It is poor
economy to spend money and (if the fruit requires paring) time, for
seeds, skins, and cores. Besides, as a rule the larger fruit is more
perfectly matured, so more wholesome as well as of a finer flavor.

Do not use the skins of fruits much. They are composed largely of woody
fibre and are intended only for a covering to the fruit. In the days
of stomach washes, the skins of fruits were noticeably abundant in the
“unswallowed” food.

For the best effect, fruits should be used without sugar. When one has
accustomed himself to the use of grape fruit and oranges without sugar,
the addition of it will make them positively disagreeable to his
taste, besides causing rebellion in the stomach.

Since acids hinder the digestion of starch, it is better to take acid
fruits at the close of a meal including starchy foods, and we should
especially avoid taking starches and acids into the mouth at the same
time, before the starch has been acted upon by the saliva.

There is great opportunity for the display of artistic skill in serving
fresh fruits, and nothing so well repays a little effort as the
combination of leaves, ferns and vines with fruits. One beautiful dish
that I remember was of plums, grapes and peaches with autumn leaves;
another, with rich branches of foliage plants and a variety of fruits.
Grape leaves combine beautifully with fruits.

One person with whom I am acquainted can use no starchy foods. The
many attempts which she has made to use them invariably result in her
becoming extremely weak, and helpless with rheumatism; but she thrives
on a diet composed almost exclusively of acid fruits and nuts. She
writes--“On my fruit and nut diet I seldom feel thirst, but after
eating even starchless vegetables I suffer exceedingly from it. I find
also that I do not require so much sleep as when living on another
diet.” Her chief fruits are sour apples, grape fruit, oranges and
mealy-ripe bananas with a few raisins, dates and figs occasionally for
dessert. She is at her best when currants are ripe; and takes them
every day as long as they can be obtained.


APPLES

The apple, of which there are said to be over 2000 varieties, has no
equal as an “all-round” fruit; but it is at its best just pared and
eaten raw. It requires thorough mastication both for digestion and
enjoyment.

When you are not feeling quite at par, cut an apple in two from stem
to blossom end and with a round pointed knife scrape it into a fine
pulp from either side. It is most refreshing and easily digested so.
Children and people whose teeth are defective can take it best that way.

The apple is the choicest salad fruit.


BANANAS

The fact that the banana is a serious cause of indigestion when just
turned yellow is quite generally understood, and fruit eaters now buy
them and keep them until they become not just soft, but _mellow ripe_,
which will be after the skins are dark or covered with dark spots. As
long as they have a “pasty” feeling in the mouth they are unfit for
food because the starch is not yet changed to sugar.

Do not try to hurry the ripening process as bananas are better when
ripened slowly. Keep them in the dark, in a not too cold place and give
them plenty of time. Large, plump bananas are far superior to small
slender ones in wholesomeness and flavor, besides being cheaper.

There is no other way of using bananas to compare with eating them “out
of hand” with the skin and fibres removed; but they may be served with
sugar and lemon juice for luncheon or with whipped cream for dessert.

Almond cream is very harmonious with bananas. Peeled bananas with a
little almond butter accompanying each mouthful make a complete and
delightful luncheon. Brazil nut butter and cream are also excellent
with bananas.


BLACKBERRIES

Wild blackberries are sweeter and finer flavored than cultivated ones
and eaten in small quantities from the bush are very enjoyable, but
they should not be taken in large quantities with their seeds. They may
be served with nut, or whipped dairy cream. With a thin syrup of sugar
and water they are delicious.


CANTALOUPE

Wash, drain, chill, cut in halves and remove the seeds with a
round-pointed spoon (not a sharp pointed knife) or with the fingers.
Do not put ice inside as it destroys the flavor. Serve on mat of grape
leaves.


CURRANTS

Wash, drain, serve on the stems plain or around a mold of sugar (made
by pressing not too dry powdered or granulated sugar into a small
glass, and unmolding in the center of the plate), or a spoonful of
sugar, on a dainty dish. Nice, very ripe currants are especially
refreshing and reviving.

=Frosted Currants=

Pick fine even bunches of currants and dip them, one at a time, into
a mixture of frothed white of egg and a very little cold water. Drain
them until nearly dry and roll in powdered sugar. Repeat the dip in
the sugar once or twice and lay them on white paper to dry. Use as a
garnish.


DATES AND NUTS

Serve dates piled on a dessert plate with halves of nuts around, or on
individual dishes with a spoonful of any desired nut butter or meal in
the center of the dish.


DATES AND CREAM

Slice dates and cover with nut or dairy cream. Dairy cream may be
whipped and piled in center of dish with fruit around.


DATES OR FIGS AND MILK

One writer on health subjects recommends dates and milk or figs and
milk as an improvement upon bread and milk. They make an excellent
combination and a satisfying meal.

Nut milk or nut cream are ideal for sweet fruits.


FIGS

Serve figs with nuts and with cream, the same as dates. For Stuffed
Dates and Figs, see Confections.


GOOSEBERRIES

Nice large ripe gooseberries are most enjoyable right from the bushes.


GRAPES

There is perhaps no fruit more highly recommended than the grape. One
says: “It is safe to say that the juice of no other fruit or vegetable
so strikingly resembles blood in its composition as the unfermented
juice of grapes.”

Another: “Grapes eaten exclusively for several days bring about
wonderful results in the system. From one to two pounds should be
consumed daily at first, gradually increasing to eight or ten pounds.”

The “grape cures” in France and Germany are too well known to require
mention. There is said to be “a life giving principle in grapes which
builds tissue and stimulates the sympathetic nervous system.”

These quotations apply particularly to fresh grapes. Cooked grapes and
juice do not agree with every one.


TO PACK GRAPES

Take the late grapes, pick them carefully, spread them in a cool place
in layers on shelves, let them remain two weeks, then pack in barrels
with dry hard-wood sawdust. Bran will answer very well. Packed in this
manner the fruit will keep good through the winter it is said. After
packing, grapes should be kept in a cool, dry place.


GRAPE FRUIT

Cut in halves crosswise, remove seeds with sharp pointed knife, and
separate the pulp from the bitter membrane between the sections. Serve
one half to each person in peel or small glass, or serve halves after
removing seeds without separating pulp. The fruit should not be cut
long before serving as the juice and pulp absorb the bitter of the cut
membrane. Taken at the close of the meal, grape fruit is an aid to
digestion. The effect will be better without sugar. As a dessert, it
is sometimes served with a tablespoonful of thick maple syrup in the
center.


GRAPE FRUIT WITH MALAGA GRAPES

Prepare grape fruit as for salad, combine with halved, seeded Malaga
grapes and sugar; refill cups which have been wiped dry after standing
in ice water. Garnish with candied cherries or blanched almonds.


GRAPE FRUIT AMBROSIA

Mix grape fruit pulp with orange pulp, grated cocoanut and sugar.
Serve, sprinkled with cocoanut, in its own cups or in glasses.


OLIVES

“When properly prepared, olives like nuts supply the place of butter
and flesh meats. Oil as eaten in the olive is far preferable to animal
oil or fat. It serves as a laxative. Its use will be found beneficial
to consumptives and it is healing to an inflamed, irritated stomach.”

The olive contains more protein than any of the other common fruits,
and with the exception of the alligator pear is the only one containing
any appreciable amount of oil. Until within a few years we have been
eating this valuable fruit in its unripe state, but now we get it, both
imported and home grown, ripe. There is just as much difference between
a ripe and green olive as between a ripe and green apple.

The ripe olive is black or dark brown in color (according to where it
was grown) and has its full quota of oil. After one has eaten ripe
olives for a time, the green ones will have a harsh, rank taste to
him. It is also much easier to acquire a taste for the ripe olive. The
large, luscious ones with meat as thick as that of a good sized plum
are truly delightful.

Those hurried on to the eastern market from California before the
holidays are not thoroughly ripened, but there are some growers who
hold them until properly matured before gathering. Olives are better
just soaked a little and eaten in that state than to be used in cooked
dishes; but when used in soups or sauces, add without cooking just
before serving.

Ripe olives are a valuable substitute for butter with bread, giving an
emulsified oil instead of a free fat, with no germs of tuberculosis or
other diseases.

The dried olives sold by Italian grocers require a long soaking and
several changes of water. They, too, become stronger flavored by
cooking. They are considerably cheaper than the bottled ones but much
less delicate in flavor.


ORANGES

“The one thing that quickest revives a human being is orange
juice.”--_Dr. Paul Edwards._

“The orange is a fruit that is distinctly health-giving. Orange juice
aids greatly in reducing the amount of putrefaction in the intestines
of nearly all persons who are submitted to clinical laboratory
tests.”--_H. Irving Hancock, in “Good Housekeeping.”_

The white separating membrane of the orange is rather indigestible, so
in many cases it is better to use the juice or pulp only.

I am going to tell you how to “drink” oranges. First, cut the orange
in halves from end to end, then cut each half in three or four pieces;
place each one of these oblong cups to the lips and extract the juice,
rejecting the seeds and leaving all the membrane. This method is most
refreshing, if not elegant. Eaten with a spoon from the halves cut
across is, next to this, most satisfying, but takes more time.

In Jamaica they peel off the outer yellow skin and cut the orange
across into two unequal portions. They extract the juice and pulp from
the larger stem section first, and reserve the smaller, sweeter section
for the last.

Again, they peel the yellow part of the rind off about one-fourth of
the way down, run the knife into the peeled end and cut away a conical
portion of the pulp, thus opening all of the sections of the orange.
They then suck out the juice, without any burned lips as the result.

One nice way to prepare the pulp is to peel the fruit as you would
an apple, cutting deep enough to remove all the white portion of the
covering; then to cut all around each section of pulp, just inside the
separating membrane, when you can remove the pure pulp. Serve in glass
sauce-dish, or in cups,--orange, glass or china.

Another dainty and satisfactory way of preparing an orange is to “cut
two circles through the skin around the fruit about ½ in. apart and
half way between the two ends. Remove all the rind except the half-inch
band. Just over one of the natural separations between the sections
of the orange, cut the band with a sharp knife. All the divisions
may then be carefully separated one from another, while all remain
attached to the girdle of yellow rind. Oranges may be laid in layers on
a fruit plate, outstretched upon the narrow piece of peeling, or they
may, after the several divisions have been carefully made, be closed
together again. A ribbon tied around the orange over the rind girdle
will preserve the spherical form and be very pretty and ornamental. It
is but the act of a moment to untie this ribbon, when the sections will
all lie before one in perfect readiness to be eaten.”--_Clipping._


PEACHES

Ripe mellow peaches are incomparable both for health and palatability.
They are equally good both for grown people and children, though one
writer says “the ripe mellow peach is really the child’s fruit.”

A friend fold me that an old Indian came to the house when her little
brother was lying at the point of death, and said, “peach juice will
keep him alive.” The mother, anxious to leave nothing untried, began
giving him the juice of stewed peaches, from which time he began to
retain his food (the mother’s milk) and to improve in every way. When
he came to be weaned, peach juice and gradually the soft halves of
peaches were his sole diet for eight months; then other foods were
introduced sparingly, but all his life peaches have formed a large part
of his diet and he is an unusually well man.

Wash and carefully rub peaches in cold water, and rub them well with a
soft cloth in wiping to remove the down, which is irritating.

Peaches should ripen on the trees; the shipped ones are often suitable
for cooking only as they are gathered before they are ripe. Some
varieties are sour and disagreeable, while others are sweet and
luscious.

Few people know how exceedingly delightful rich juicy white peaches are.


PEACHES AND CREAM

Pare peaches just as short a time before they are to be served as
possible. Cut in halves, quarters or thick slices. Do not sweeten but
pass sugar and unwhipped cream with them. Almond or cocoanut cream are
especially suitable for peaches.


PEACH SNOW

Add sweetened cream to stiffly-beaten whites of eggs (⅓ cup to each
white) and pour over peaches just before serving. All must be cold.

Peaches combine nicely with bananas and with red raspberries. The juice
of the berries may be served over the peaches instead of cream.


PINEAPPLES

The pineapple is another of the universal favorites and deservedly. Its
delightful flavor is unequaled and the fresh juice contains bromelin,
a remarkably active principle which aids digestion both in the stomach
and in the intestinal tract. A slice or two of pineapple taken at the
close of a meal gives a marked laxative effect. The use of pineapple
in diphtheria is well known. I knew a very successful physician in one
of our large cities who always had quantities of pineapple canned each
year for use in diphtheria cases. The digestive ferment is not quite so
active in the cooked fruit as in the uncooked.


SHREDDED PINEAPPLE

Use only choice large well ripened sound pineapples. Wash and drain;
give the crown a twist with the hand, when it will come out easily if
the fruit is ripe. Set the pineapple on a board and with a large sharp
knife pare it by cutting slices down from the top all around, cut thick
enough to remove all the woody covering (the fruit in connection with
that has very little flavor), leaving only the deepest eyes.

After removing the eyes, take the pineapple in the left hand with the
base up and shred it by picking up small pieces all around with the
tines of a silver fork. It will come off easily from that end, leaving
the core, which should be wrung to obtain all the juice.

Let the fruit stand in layers with sugar, ¼ to ½ cup, (or ¼ to ⅓ cup
sugar, ½ to 1 tablespn. lemon juice and ¾ cup water) to each pint,
for some time before serving, or, serve plain and pass sugar with it.
Pineapple and strawberries or raspberries or oranges with lemon juice
and sugar are nice alone, or with cake, for dessert.


PINEAPPLE AND GRAPE FRUIT

Equal quantities of prepared pineapple and grape fruit with sugar and
the juice of either poured over.

Peach, orange and pineapple is another nice combination.


PINEAPPLE AND WHIPPED CREAM

Drain finely-shredded pineapple and beat with whipped cream, as much as
can be used and keep the combination stiff. Serve cold in glasses.


PINEAPPLE AND STRAWBERRY AMBROSIA

Equal quantities ripe strawberries, shredded pineapple and cream.
Whip cream, place layer of pineapple in dish, sprinkle with sugar,
cover with cream, then make a layer of strawberries, sugar and cream.
Continue. Have cream on top. Serve cold with sponge cake or cocoanut
crisps.


PINEAPPLE AND ORANGE AMBROSIA

Drained shredded pineapple, orange pulp and juice, grated cocoanut and
sugar, in layers.


RAISINS

Raisins are nutritious and valuable foods, containing sometimes as
high as 61 per cent. of grape sugar and a considerable proportion of
albuminoids. They are suitably combined with all kinds of bread and
nuts. One thing that makes them so satisfying is that they require
thorough mastication.


RASPBERRIES--RED

When necessary to wash, have cold water in a deep pan and turn the
berries in, not more than a quart at a time. (Do not pour the water
over the berries as that bruises them.) Rinse up and down in the
water with the hands and remove quickly to a colander. Drain, pile in
dish and serve at once. Lemon or currant juice poured over makes a
harmonious combination. ⅓ or ½ very ripe currants may be mixed with the
berries. Serve Brazil nuts or blanched almonds with these combinations.


RASPBERRIES--BLACK

Black raspberries have a peculiar spicy flavor not found in any other
fruit and when plump and thoroughly ripened may be used in moderate
quantities in their natural state.


STRAWBERRIES

The perfect way to serve strawberries is the French--with the hulls
on, without washing. Pass sugar with them, or pile the berries
around a mold of sugar on individual plates, or, set a dainty cup
or glass containing sugar in the center of the plate and pile the
berries around. But if the berries are very sandy, wash the same as
red raspberries. Wash berries always before hulling unless obliged
to let stand after hulling, then do not wash until just ready to
serve. The little strawberry hullers snip the hulls out so quickly and
so perfectly without staining the fingers that they seem among the
indispensables of housekeeping.


ORANGE STRAWBERRIES

Put sliced berries into glasses and pour sweetened orange juice over
to more than cover. Let stand in a cool place 3 or 4 hrs. to improve
the color. They may be served with an uncooked meringue garnished with
halves or quarters of berries or a slice of orange.


WATERMELON

The flavor of watermelon is better if cooled in water instead of on
ice. To serve cut the melon in halves across and cut off pieces from
the ends so that they will stand. Serve the pulp by spoonfuls, scooped
out with a tablespoon. If convenient take the pieces out before sending
to the table, remove the seeds and return the pieces to the shell, then
keep in a cool place until serving time.

The watermelon furnishes an abundance of pure distilled water.
Watermelons that are not very sweet maybe served with almond cream and
sugar.


WHORTLEBERRIES

The most desirable of this family is the large purple soft pulpy sweet
juicy berry growing in the swamps, and called in some parts of the
country “blueberry.” It is delightful with nut or dairy cream or with
sugar or in bread and milk. Its juice being so sweet it is one of the
most suitable berries for sauce with cereals. In cakes puddings or pies
it is equally enjoyable.

The so-called “huckleberry,” though more seedy, has a nice flavor when
cooked.


FRUITS--COOKED


APPLE SAUCE

Select nice tart apples; wash, drain, cut out the blossom end of each
so that the little black particles will not get on to the fruit. Pare
as thin as possible. When all are pared, cut into quarters, and core
by cutting from both stem and blossom end downward to the center, just
below the core. After coring, throw enough quarters into the kettle
(granite, porcelain or aluminum) to about cover the bottom, and turn
the quarters core side down. Then arrange another layer in the same way
and continue until all are in. Pour boiling water over to half cover
the apples (more or less according to the juiciness of the apples),
cover kettle and set over hot fire. Cook without removing cover until
apples are perfectly tender; remove from fire at once, stir in a
little sugar if desired and a trifle of salt. This method gives a nice
white well cooked sauce with a fresh apple taste. Placing the apples
as directed causes them to cook tender quickly and evenly. The salt
improves the flavor unless too much is used.


STRAINED APPLE SAUCE

When apples are small or knotty, cook without paring, rub through
colander and add a little sugar.


BAKED APPLE SAUCE

Place quartered apples in pudding dish as for apple sauce. Sprinkle
delicately with sugar between the layers and over the top. Pour water
in at the side of the dish so as to leave the sugar on the top. Cover
and bake for several hours until the apples assume a rich red color.


BAKED QUARTERS OF APPLES

Wash, quarter and core but do not pare apples; lay cut side down in
pudding dish, pour very little if any water over, cover close, bake
until tender. Remove cover and dry out well. Eat from the fingers,
rejecting the skins, or scrape the pulp from the skin with a teaspoon.
The skin imparts such richness and flavor to the pulp that it seems to
have been sweetened with sugar.


BAKED APPLES

To the natural taste, the apple is best just washed, put into a baking
pan with little if any water (depending upon the juiciness of the
apple), covered at first and baked until tender and dry. Some prefer to
have the apples cored with ½-1 teaspn. of sugar (brown sugar sometimes)
placed in the core space.


LEMON APPLES, ORANGE APPLES, AND OTHERS

Core and pare nice large perfect apples. Place in the core space sugar
with a little grated lemon or orange rind. Sprinkle outside of apples
with sugar and turn a little lemon juice over for “Lemon Apples” or
“Orange Apples.” Bake until just tender, with or without a little water.

Use citron, cocoanut, raisins or nuts with sugar for other varieties.
Fill core space with jelly for “Jelly Apples.” Serve plain or with nut
cream or whipped dairy cream, or with cocoanut or custard sauce or with
wafers or nuts for dessert, at a meal without vegetables, especially
starchy vegetables.

Lemon and jelly apples make suitable accompaniments to meat dishes.


BAKED SWEET APPLES

Bake whole with plenty of water at first (covered part of the time)
until perfectly tender and all the water is evaporated. Serve for
dessert, or for breakfast or supper with nuts, or with nut or dairy
cream, or in bread and milk, than which nothing is more delicious.


“MOTHER” CRANSON’S STEWED SWEET APPLES

Put whole apples into preserving kettle, cover with thin syrup of sugar
and water and cook until tender (carefully changing the apples from top
to bottom once or twice) and the syrup just a little thick. Place the
apples on plates and turn the syrup over.


STEWED BANANAS

Slice bananas, stew with a little sugar water and a trifle of ground or
crushed anise seed tied in a piece of cheese cloth.

Prunes may be flavored the same.


BANANAS IN BUTTER

Simmer bananas in butter in an aluminum or agate frying pan covered, on
the top of the stove where it is not too hot. They will not be browned
but simply stewed.


BANANAS AND RAISINS

Cook raisins in a broad flat pan in water for an hour. Slice bananas
over, cover and cook 10 m.


BAKED BANANAS

The simplest way to bake bananas is in the skins. It takes just 20 m.
in a moderate oven. To eat, strip a piece of skin about an inch wide
from the top side and partake of the baked fruit from the remaining
skin in teaspoonfuls.

Bananas may be baked whole with a little water after peeling, and
served with orange or cream sauce.

A little melted butter may be poured over bananas before baking or
they may be rolled in lemon juice and sugar and baked. For a richer
dish, turn mixed melted butter, sugar and lemon juice over bananas in
lengthwise halves in agate pan. Bake 15-20 m. in slow oven. Serve with
meat dishes sometimes.


BAKED CRUMBED BANANAS

Roll peeled bananas in fine granella, cracker or zwieback crumbs mixed
with sugar. Bake in moderate oven till just tender. Serve at once.


BANANAS BAKED WITH TOMATOES

Put a thin layer of stewed or sliced tomatoes in the bottom of a baking
pan. Cover with bananas sliced crosswise. Bake.


CRANBERRIES

Cranberries are said to “promote digestion and purify the blood.”
There is no question but they are a desirable fruit and should be used
freely in their season.

=Stewed Cranberries=

    1 qt. berries,
    ¾ cup sugar,
    1-1½ cup water.

Pour boiling water over cranberries, let stand 2 m., or until cold;
drain, add sugar and water, cook covered, until boiling all through.
Rub through colander if the skins are objectionable. 2-3 tablespns. of
lemon juice and more sugar may be added.

=Baked Cranberries.=

Make syrup of 1 pt. of water and 1½ cup of sugar; boil, cool. Pour over
1 qt. of cranberries in baking dish. Bake until clear.

=Cranberries With Raisins=

    1 qt. berries
    ¾-1 cup seeded raisins
    1 cup sugar
    1 pint water

Stew raisins in water until nearly tender; pour boiling water over
cranberries and drain; cook all together until berries are done.

A larger proportion of raisins and less sugar may be used.


BAKED PEACHES

Whole, pared, cling-stone peaches; sugar, butter and lemon juice. Bake
40 m. May be served with meat dishes, or as dessert.


BAKED QUINCES--Delicious

Wash, pare, halve, core. (Save skins and cores for jelly). Cover with
a large quantity of thin sugar and water syrup. Bake covered, basting
often and turning occasionally until tender and the syrup rich. Uncover
at the last for a short time.


PLAIN BAKED QUINCES

Pare and core quinces, bake with water only, basting. Serve with hard
or creamy sauce or with nut cream and sugar.


RHUBARB

Rhubarb is not a fruit but the stalk of the plant and as its acid is
oxalic, it is a somewhat questionable article of diet. At all events it
should not be used freely.

=Stewed Rhubarb=

    1 qt. rhubarb
    ½ cup sugar

Wash rhubarb, do not peel, cut into ¾ in. pieces; cook with sugar, on
the back of the stove until juicy; then stew till tender.

=Stewed Rhubarb, No. 2=

    1 qt. rhubarb
    scant ⅔ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    ¼ cup water

Cook all together.

=Baked Rhubarb=

Put rhubarb in baking dish with sugar and lemon juice as for stewing,
with or without a little water. Cover and bake until tender.

It is said that if young cherry leaves are scalded and the juice added
to cooked rhubarb, it will impart the flavor of cherries to the rhubarb.


STEWED DRIED FRUITS

The flavors of dried fruits are more natural and delicate with
prolonged soaking and short (if any) cooking. Choice dried apples and
apricots are especially enjoyable soaked over night or longer without
any cooking. The juice from them makes an exceedingly refreshing drink.

Pour boiling water over fruit that requires washing to more perfectly
loosen the dirt, then quickly add cold water. Wash thoroughly, cover
with warm water and let stand for from 12 to 48 hrs. When perfectly
swollen and soft, add sugar, if it is to be used, bring to the boiling
point quickly and remove from the fire. These directions if followed
will cause apples, apricots and peaches to seem almost like fresh
stewed fruit.

A few fresh grapes stewed with peaches give them a nice flavor.

Raisins also (previously cooked) are nice with dried peaches.

The most delightful combination with dried apples is ⅓ prunelles.
Raisins are also nice with apples.

=Stewed Dried Apricots=

    ½ lb. apricots
    3½ cups water
    ½ cup sugar

Follow general directions.


PRUNES--SWEET CALIFORNIA

These require no sugar but will bear a little longer cooking than
peaches and apricots.

¾ prunes and ¼ apricots make a nice combination, also raisins or figs
and prunes.

=Prune Marmalade=

Cook prunes with a small amount of water and rub through colander. This
removes the skins or breaks them up so that many can take them who
otherwise could not. Served with almonds, beaten white of egg or almond
or whipped cream, the marmalade makes a nice dessert.

=Steamed Prunes--par excellence=

Soak large prunes in a very little water, stirring occasionally so that
all will be moistened. Steam ¾ of an hour. Cover as soon as removed
from the steamer. Serve warm for breakfast. They may be steamed an hour
without soaking.

=Stewed Figs=

Wash, soak, cook until tender, reduce liquor to syrup and pour over
fruit. Serve with wafers or nuts or with whipped cream flavored with
vanilla or almond.

=Steamed Figs--best of all=

Wash figs and steam 25-35 m. according to dryness. Long steaming gives
them a strong flavor. Cover, and serve warm. The figs may be soaked the
same as prunes before steaming.

=Fruit Butter=

Stew together 1½ lb. prunes and 1 lb. of dried apricots, no sugar. Rub
through colander and cook to the consistency of butter.


TO CAN FRUITS


Suggestions

The best quality of aluminum is the ideal material for the preserving
kettle; but granite, porcelain or earthenware may be used.

Thorough sterilization of the jars or cans is one of the most important
parts of fruit canning. I always wash and sterilize mine when I empty
them.

After washing the covers of Mason jars, bake them in a moderate oven
for 2 or 3 hours; scrape them on the inside if necessary but do not
wet them, and screw them on to the jars, which should have been well
washed, scalded, wiped with a clean towel and thoroughly dried by
standing right side up in a warm place.

The rubbers should be put on when the covers are, so that the jars will
be all ready for use.

When old rubbers are in good condition they are just as good as new
ones. Sometimes two thin ones may be used together.

There is a certain black rubber that should not be used with delicate
flavored fruits as it injures their flavor. It does not improve the
flavor of any fruit.

New rubbers should be washed and rubbed well in soapsuds and rinsed
before using.

Keep the jars in a dry place and when you come to use them turn them
over once in a pan of boiling water, scalding the covers the same.

Do not waste time, strength, jars or sugar on imperfect, decayed or
unripe fruit. The probabilities are that it will not keep; and if it
does the appearance and flavor will be inferior.

Put the fruit into the jars _boiling hot_ and seal immediately. Do not
try to remove the froth or air bubbles (pure air will do no harm in
cans, and it will be pure when the fruit is at boiling heat all around
it and will remain so if the can is well sealed), because while you are
trying to let the air out the fruit is cooling on top and the germs
from the outside air are settling upon it.

If the fruit gets below the boiling point while filling the jars,
return it to the fire and reheat it. _Fill the jars to overflowing._
Fasten the covers on perfectly tight, press the edges down all around
into the rubber of Mason jars, if inclined to leak. Do not tighten the
covers after the fruit is cold.

With Lightning jars it is sometimes necessary to slip little splinters
of wood (bits of berry boxes) under the wires to make the covers tight
enough.

When the covers are perfectly adjusted, invert the jars and leave them
until cool. This not only shows whether any are leaking or not but
fills any spaces there may be.

Keep canned fruit in a dark place. The light will cause it to lose its
flavor as well as color. Wrap jars in paper if necessary.

The simplest way to fill jars is to set them in a row on a towel wrung
out of cold water and folded so that it is thick. The jars must be cold
also. Or, the towel may be wrung out of hot water and the jars rinsed
in hot water before filling. In either case have the covers warm.

Bear in mind that “sugar, when largely used, is more injurious than
meat.”

Some fruits, rich fine-flavored pears and peaches, whortleberries and
others are excellent canned without sugar. They taste more like fresh
fruit.

I always can whortleberries without water, so as to have them for pies.
For sauce, water may be added after they are opened.

Gooseberries canned without water or sugar make delightful, fresh
tasting pies in winter.

Never fail to secure black currants if possible for pies.

Always label fruit before putting it away, giving the year in which it
was put up.

Canned fruits and vegetables should be opened two hours or more before
serving, to give the fresh taste which comes with the restoration of
oxygen.

There is much work at the best connected with fruit canning, so I have
tried to simplify it as much as possible. The methods given here are
those which I have used for years with good results.


TO CAN SOLID BERRIES

Cherries, whortleberries, red and black currants and all berries that
do not crush easily may be put into the kettle in layers with sugar
(never more than ½ pt. of sugar to 2 qts. of fresh fruit and usually
less), brought to the boiling point slowly and put into jars with very
little trouble. The following is an average proportion of sugar and
water to use with this class of berries:

Blackberries--2 qts. berries, ½-¾ cup sugar, 2 cups water.

Blk. Raspberries--2 qts. berries, ½-¾ cup sugar, 2 cups water.

Gooseberries, green--2 qts. berries, 1-1½ cup sugar, 4 cups water.

Gooseberries, ripe--2 qts. berries, 1-1½ cup sugar, 1-1½ cup water.

Whortleberries,--2 qts. berries, ½ cup sugar (if any), 1 tablespn.
water.

Rhubarb--1 qt. rhubarb in ¾ in. lengths, ½ cup sugar, no water.


TO CAN PEACHES AND FRUITS OF THAT CLASS

=Peaches=

Wash peaches, rubbing well, drain, pare as thin as possible and drop
into cold water to keep them from turning dark. If the peaches are very
ripe, put a few at a time into a wire basket and plunge into boiling
water. Hold them there a moment, then quickly turn them into cold
water; after which the skins will slip off easily.

This is a quicker method and does not waste the peaches, but I have
thought they were more apt to turn dark.

For each rounded quart of peaches, make a syrup of ⅓-½ cup of sugar
and 1-1½ cup of water, the water in which the peaches were standing.
Bring the syrup to the boiling point, drop the peaches in (if in halves
the cut side down), boil until thoroughly heated through, or until
tender; drop the peaches into the jars, pour boiling syrup over, seal,
following “Suggestions” carefully.

=Pears=

    1 rounded qt. (8 or 9) pears in halves
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    1-1½ cup water

Finish the same as peaches.

The lemon juice gives character to the pears.

I once had some pears that were so flavorless it seemed hardly worth
while to can them, but I tied ground anise seed in small pieces of
cheese cloth and cooked with them, besides adding lemon juice, and
they were excellent. Small pears and those with thin skins may be
canned without paring. They are richer but the skins sometimes cause
flatulence.

Do not can pears while they are hard.

=Plums=

    1 qt. plums
    ¼-⅓ cup sugar
    ¼-½ cup water

It is a good plan to prick the plums on all sides with a fork before
cooking.

=Quinces and Sweet Apples=

    6 qts. quinces in eighths
    6 qts. sweet apples in quarters
    5 qts. water
    4-6 cups sugar

Cook quinces in water until tender, remove with skimmer; cook apples
in same water, remove apples, measure water, adding more if necessary;
dissolve sugar in water, heat to boiling, add fruit, simmer a few
minutes and put into jars.

Quinces are much improved by combining with sweet apples. When the
apples are cooked with them, the quinces become more tender.

Quinces and citron and quinces and pears may also be combined.

=Cranberries and Sweet Apples=

    1 qt. cranberries
    1½ qt. sweet apples in quarters
    ⅔ qt. cold water
    ¾-1 cup sugar

Cook sugar, water and cranberries together, until the cranberries begin
to crack; add the apples and cook all slowly until the apples are soft.
Put into jars and seal.

=To Can Strawberries=

Also red raspberries and all delicate berries.

For each 2 qts. of hulled berries (just enough to fill one quart jar),
use 1 cup of granulated sugar. Put a layer of berries into an earthen
or granite ware dish, sprinkle with sugar, cover with another layer of
berries and so on. (Strawberries are so juicy they will not bear any
water). Let berries and sugar stand together in the ice box or cellar
for several hours. They may be prepared late in the afternoon and put
into the jars the first thing the next morning.

When ready to can the fruit, drain off the juice, heat it to boiling,
turn the berries carefully into it and shake and turn the dish once
in a while to keep the fruit heating evenly. When just boiling all
through, dip carefully into cans with a handled cup. Put the covers
on quickly, no matter how many bubbles of air there are nor how much
froth there is in the jars, and screw down tight with a can opener.
After pressing the edge of the covers down if necessary, lay the jars
on the side (instead of inverting, for strawberries) and turn over
occasionally while cooling.

When perfectly cold, set jars upright and you will find the berries
evenly distributed through the jars and they will never rise to the
top.

Allowing the berries to stand in sugar and afterwards putting them into
boiling syrup hardens them so that they keep their shape. It is better
to heat just enough at once to fill each jar. You can have several
dishes (milk crocks, granite, porcelain and aluminum kettles) on the
stove at once at different stages of heating so that you can fill one
jar after another.

This was my auntie’s method and I have never seen it excelled.

=Pineapple=

    ¼-⅓ cup sugar
    ½-1 tablespn. lemon juice
    ¾ cup water
    1 pt. pineapple

Prepare pineapple as for fresh pineapple, put into stone jars or
earthen vessels with layers of sugar; stand in ice box a few hours
(not long enough to ferment), drain off the juice, add lemon juice and
water, heat to boiling, add fruit. Let all just boil up, fill jars,
seal as other fruits. The delicate flavor of pineapple is lost by long
cooking.

Grated pineapple canned with ½ cup of sugar to the quart is suitable
for ices and other uses.

=Rhubarb--cooked=

Put stewed rhubarb into jars as soon as it boils up well.

=Rhubarb Without Cooking--for pies=

A reliable method which gives the natural flavor.

Wash rhubarb and cut into inch pieces without peeling, pour boiling
water over, drain at once, cool, pack in cans and fill with boiled,
strained, ice-cold water. Seal cans, invert in cold place and cover
from the light. Set upright after a few hours. To use, drain, let stand
in fresh cold water ½ hour and drain again.

Cranberries may be canned in the same way.

=Watermelon Rind or Citron=

Pare off the thin green rind, cut into pieces 1 in. square, or into
strips, stand in cold water for two or three hours, changing the water
occasionally; drain thoroughly, make syrup of 1 pt. water to 1 or 1½
pt. sugar, according to the richness desired. (3 or 4 tablespns. of
lemon juice may be used with the larger quantity of sugar). When syrup
is boiling, add rind, simmer until pieces can be pierced easily with a
broom straw, or until they are clear, put into jars and seal.

One part raisins to five or six of the rind gives a nice flavor. Or,
orange flowers, rose leaves or rose water may be used, but the fruit is
nice without any flavoring.

Green melons which did not have time to ripen before the frost, are
excellent prepared in this way.

The rind may be steamed before putting it into the syrup, and less
water used for the syrup.

=Concord Grapes=

    2 qts. grapes
    ¾ cup sugar
    ½ cup water

Pulp the grapes, run skins through the food cutter and cook for 20 m.
in the water. Boil pulp until tender and rub through colander to remove
the seeds. Add pulp and sugar to skins, heat to boiling and put into
jars. The juice may be strained from the pulp and used to cook the
skins in.

=Barberries=

    1 qt. berries
    2 cups sugar
    ½-1 cup water

Very nice for garnishing fruit salads, desserts or cakes.

=Tomatoes=

Select only perfectly fresh, well ripened tomatoes, wash and drop into
kettle of boiling water, remove with skimmer, drop into cold water,
peel, leave whole or slice. Boil well and put into jars the same as
other fruit. Long boiling frees the acid and takes away the fresh,
delicate flavor. When tomatoes are very watery, drain off some of the
liquid and can it separately for use in soups and broths.

=Tomatoes for Soups and Sauces=

Wash and slice tomatoes without peeling. Heat to boiling, rub through
fine colander or sieve to remove skins and seeds. Reheat and put into
jars.

=Whole Tomatoes=

Pack peeled or unpeeled tomatoes in wide-mouthed jars. Cook a few nice
ripe tomatoes, strain and pour the liquid, cold, over tomatoes in jars,
seal, set jars in cold water as in canning vegetables, bring slowly to
boiling point and boil ½ hour. Remove from water, tighten covers and
invert jars as usual.


FRUIT JUICES

Begin with the earliest fruits and can some of the juice of each kind
through the summer until you come to grapes and apples in the autumn.
When diluted with water, these juices are delightful beverages for sick
or well. A little lemon juice gives character to the drink. Without
diluting, they make nice flavorings for fruit salads, egg creams and
pudding sauces. Blueberry, black raspberry and other sweet juices make
excellent dressings for grains instead of milk or cream.

=Grape Juice=

Concords or some of the dark purple grapes are the richest and most
satisfactory for juice. Pick the grapes from the stems, wash and drain,
put into a preserving kettle without water, cover and put on back of
stove on an asbestos pad or a ring so they will heat slowly. When the
skins are broken and the juice is free, bring just to the boiling
point, put into jelly bags and drain without squeezing. To each quart
of juice add from ½ to 1 cup of sugar. Very ripe grapes will require no
sugar. Heat to boiling and can the same as fruit.

Add more water to the pulp that is left in the jelly bag, reheat,
strain, boil and put into large jars for a drink, or, rub the pulp
through a colander, sweeten, heat and can for marmalade.

_To Bottle Juices_--Nearly fill bottles, standing on cloth wrung out
of cold water, with boiling juice, through hot funnel. Press clean
cork into bottle, cut off even with the top of the bottle and cover
immediately with sealing wax made by melting together resin and oil.
Use only enough oil to make the resin soft enough to spread over the
cork and around the edges of the bottle. If too soft, the wax will run
off.

=Condensed Fruit Juices=

Cook apple and other fruit juices rapidly until thick, then simmer
slowly over the fire or in the oven until as thick as desired. Seal in
jars or put into glasses or cups as jelly. Convenient for travelling,
diluted.


APPLES

When apples are plentiful or likely to spoil, make into any of the
apple sauces, put hot into jars and seal.

=Baked Apples=

Bake unpared apples, sweet or sour, in halves or quarters, leaving them
rather juicy, put into jars and seal. On opening, put apples into oven
in baking dish and dry out a little more.

=Combinations of Fruits for Canning=

Red or black raspberries with currant juice.

Red or black raspberries with cherries.

Plums with sweet apples.

Currants or currant juice with pineapple.

Orange, strawberry and pineapple juices with sugar, for strawberries
and pineapple canned together, or for pineapple alone.

Strawberries with pineapple.

Pears and barberries. Cook barberries in water, rub through colander,
add sugar, 1-1½ cup to the pint of pulp. Return to the fire and when
hot, lay in halves or quarters of nice ripe pears. Cook until pears
are tender. If the pears are not quite soft, steam, or cook in pulp
without sugar first. Sweet apples may be used instead of pears.


JELLIES

Because of the large proportion of sugar required in jellies it is not
best to use them freely.

Fruit for jelly should always be a little underripe and should not be
picked just after a rain. Combine the juices of such fruits as do not
jelly easily, or of the more expensive fruits, with apple juice which
jellies the easiest of all. With strong flavored fruits, apple makes
the jelly more agreeable. Jellies may be made in the winter of canned
fruit juices and the juice from apple skins and cores. The addition
of lemon juice to sweet fruits will convert them into jelly-making
products. A few pieces of rose geranium leaves dropped into apple jelly
just before putting it into glasses and removed in a minute, give the
jelly a nice flavor.

Always boil the juice the required length of time before adding the
sugar. It requires longer boiling on damp days.

Heat sugar in flat pan in oven before adding to jelly.

Thorough straining is necessary to make clear jelly. For the finest
jelly, use first a double thickness of mosquito netting; then the same
of cheese cloth, and lastly, one thickness of flannel.

Wet the cloth before putting the fruit in, to save the waste of juice.
Hang in a warm place to drain.

It is said that if a little jelly dropped into cold water falls
immediately to the bottom, the jelly is done; or, if it jellies on the
spoon it is done.

Glasses for jelly may be set cold on a cold cloth, or warm on a warm
cloth. Fill to the brim, as the jelly shrinks.

When the jelly is soft, set in the sun for a day or two, covered with
panes of glass. When ready to set away, turn hot melted paraffine over
the jelly. The heat destroys any germs which may have settled on the
top. Cover with paper or with tin covers and set in a dark place. When
using the jelly, wash and save the paraffine.

If jelly is to be moved or shipped, use a covering of ¼ inch of
powdered sugar instead of the paraffine.

Or, cut rounds of toilet paper, two for each glass, large enough to
overlap an inch; dip one at a time into a saucer of cold boiled milk,
cover glass and press down, then put on the second piece quickly.

One thickness of Manila paper may be used instead of the toilet paper.
When dry, a thick parchment-like cover will be formed and the jelly
will keep well. Some housewives cover jelly while hot, thinking it
keeps better.

=To Make Jelly Tumblers=

Soak a cord in turpentine, tie it tight around bottles and set fire to
the cord.

=Currant Jelly=

Wash and drain currants. They are usually left on the stems but strain
more easily if stemmed. Crush the berries, a few at a time and throw
into the preserving kettle. Do not add any water. Set on back of
range and heat slowly to nearly, not quite, boiling. Strain, measure
juice, return to kettle and set over fire. At the same time put into a
moderate oven in broad bottomed pans, sugar in the proportion of ¾-1
pt. to each pint of juice (¾ is sufficient). After juice begins to
boil, boil 20 m., skimming as the scum rises. Add hot sugar, stir until
sugar is dissolved, remove from fire and put at once into glasses.

⅓ white currants may be used with red.

A thinner jelly to be used with meats and over puddings underneath the
meringue, may be made with ½ pt. of sugar to the pint of juice.

A little celery salt may be added when jelly is to be used with meats.

=Currant and Raspberry Jelly=

⅔ currant juice and ⅓ raspberry or ⅓ currant and ⅔ raspberry makes a
delightful combination.

=Black Currant Jelly=

Prepare stemmed currants as for red currant jelly. Use ¼ to ½ cup of
water to each quart of currants and ¾ pt. of sugar to a pint of juice.
10 m. boiling is sufficient.

½ or ⅔ apple juice will make a more delicate flavored jelly.

=Jelly of Apple Parings and Cores=

Measure skins and cores by pressing firmly into the measure. Add ⅓ (no
more) as much water as of fruit--you will think it is not enough. Boil
20 m., stirring often. Strain. Measure juice, boil 20-30 m., according
to juiciness of apples, skimming. Add ½ as much sugar, hot, as of
juice, boil 5-10 m., or until foamy. Put at once into glasses.

If apple jelly is as thick as desired when it first cools, it will be
too thick after standing a few days. If apples are very juicy, use only
one-half as much water.

=Apple Jelly=

Wash apples and cut into quarters or eighths. Do not pare or core. Add
¼ as much water as of apples in the kettle. Cook, stirring occasionally
until apples are tender, not too soft. Finish as in jelly of parings.
It is difficult to give the exact time for cooking, as apples vary
in jellying properties. Use less water if apples are very juicy. One
quince to every 10 or 12 apples gives a nice flavor. A few green grapes
combined with apples or crab apples make a nice jelly.

Crab and Baldwin apples may be combined.

=Apple and Cranberry Jelly=

Stew 1 qt. of apple parings with 1 cup of cranberries and a pint of
water until tender. Strain. There should be about ¾ of a pint of
juice. Boil 5 m.; add ¾ pt. sugar, boil 2-4 m. Or, use 1 doz. large
tart apples to 1 qt. of berries, or equal parts apple and cranberry
juice. Proceed as in other jellies.

=Elder-berry and Apple Jelly=

Cook elder-berries with ½ cup of water to each quart of berries. Strain
and combine with apple juice in the proportion of ⅓ elder-berry juice
to ⅔ apple juice. Use ¾-1 pt. of sugar to each pint of juice. Finish as
for currant jelly. Elder-berries alone make a strong flavored jelly,
but this combination is delightful.

Strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, cherries, wild cherries,
pineapple, barberries, peaches, plums and some other fruits, all make
better jelly by combining with apple juice in proportions according to
flavor. Use no water with any of the fruits but the apple.

Currant juice may be combined with these fruits instead of apple juice.

=Green Gooseberry Jelly=

2 qts. berries, ¾ qt. water; stew, mash, strain; boil 20 m. for each
quart of juice, add 1 qt. of hot sugar, boil 2-3 minutes.

=Quince Jelly=

Wash quinces, cut into quarters or eighths, remove part or all of the
seeds, use ⅓-½ as much water as of fruit and ½ as much sugar as of
juice. Cook and finish as apple jelly.

⅓-½ apple juice with quince is better.

=Cranberry Jelly=

Use one cup of water to each 4 qts. of cranberries; cook until the
berries are tender, strain and use equal quantities of sugar and juice.
Boil the juice 10-12 m., add the sugar hot, stir till it is dissolved
and turn the jelly into glasses or a mold. The jelly may be molded in a
shallow pan and when perfectly cold cut into cubes.

=Jellied Cranberry Pulp=

Rub stewed cranberries in the preceding recipe through the colander,
boil 8 m., add sugar, stir carefully until dissolved, mold.

=Jellied Cranberry Sauce=

1 qt. berries, 1 pt. sugar, ½-1 cup water. Pour water over berries with
sugar, in kettle, cover, cook 10 m. without stirring. Put into large or
individual molds. Unmold at serving time.

=Blueberry Jelly=

If berries are very dry, add a little water, heat, strain; use ½-¾ as
much sugar as of juice.

=Blueberry Jelly No. 2=

4 qts. berries, 1 cup water; cook and strain, add 2 tablespns. of lemon
juice to each pint of juice. Cook 20 m., add ¾ as much sugar, hot, as
of juice, boil up well, pour into glasses.

=Grape Jelly=

Wild grapes are preferable, but underripe Concords, Catawbas, and other
varieties may be used.

Proceed as for currant jelly, using only ⅔ as much sugar as of juice.
If necessary, boil 5 m. after sugar is added. Use no water with
cultivated grapes, but with underripe wild grapes, ½ cup of water may
be added to each quart of stemmed grapes.

=Raspberry and Currant Jam=

Take ¾ their weight of sugar to berries. Mash berries in kettle over
fire, add 1 pt. currant juice to each 2 qts. of berries, cook until
thickened, 40-45 m., stirring and skimming, add sugar hot, boil, put
into glasses or seal in jars.

=Strawberry Jam=

Allow ¾ their weight of sugar to berries; cook in a little of the
sugar, stirring, 20-30 m. Add remainder of sugar hot, cook 10-20 m., if
necessary. Small berries may be used for jam.

=Gooseberry Jam=

Press the juice from 3 oranges and shave off the rind, being careful
not to get any of the white part. Remove blossoms and stems from 5 lbs.
gooseberries, seed 2 lbs. of raisins, and chop all together very fine.
Add 3-4 lbs. sugar and the orange juice and cook slowly for an hour.
Turn into jars or tumblers and when cold spread a layer of powdered
sugar on top of glass and seal.

=Mrs. Chandler’s Rhubarb Jam=

    3 lbs. (3½ qts.) of rhubarb in inch lengths
    1½ lb. (3 cups) sugar
    ½ lb. of figs or raisins, chopped
    juice of 1 lemon
    1 cup water

Let rhubarb and sugar stand together over night, add other ingredients
and cook slowly for about 3 hours.

=Rhubarb and Pineapple Jam=

    6 lbs. (7 qts.) rhubarb in inch lengths
    1 large pineapple, grated
    3 lbs. (3 pints) sugar

Cook rhubarb and sugar ½-¾ of an hour, add pineapple, boil up, put into
jars, seal.

=Melrose Apple Butter=

7 lbs. pared, quartered and cored apples, 3 lbs. molasses sugar if
obtainable, if not, dark brown sugar. Put apples and sugar in layers in
a kettle, cover tight, let stand 12 hours or over night. Then let come
just to boiling and simmer without stirring, or uncovering for 5-12
hours.

Apple juice made by boiling the skins of apples in ⅓ their bulk of
water, as for jelly, with lemon juice to taste, is a valuable addition.
Finely-ground coriander seed may be added. A little date or prune
marmalade may also be used.

A delightful butter may be made by combining plums and apples.

=Elder-berry and Apple Butter=

To each 2 qts. of elder-berry juice prepared as for jelly take 2 lbs.
brown sugar and ½ peck sour apples. Put juice and sugar on to boil and
add the apples pared, quartered and cored; simmer slowly until thick.
May be put into jelly glasses.

Equal quantities tomato and apple make a nice butter.

=Grape Marmalade=

Pulp the grapes and put the skins through the food cutter. Cook the
pulp and rub through the colander to remove the seeds. Take ½-¾ as much
sugar as there is of fruit, cook 20 m. The skins improve the flavor.

=Lemon Peaches=

    1 cup lemon juice
    1 cup water
    1 cup brown sugar
    peaches to fill 3 pint jars

Wash and rub the peaches well, drop into boiling syrup of lemon juice,
sugar and water, cook until tender, put into jars and seal.

=Ripe Cucumber Pickles=

Pare and seed cucumbers and cut into eighths if large. Soak over night
in lemon juice and water; in the morning drain, add to hot syrup and
boil until soft; skim out of syrup and put into jars standing in hot
water. Keep hot. Boil syrup 10-15 m., pour over fruit and seal; let
stand three or four weeks before using.

  _Syrup_--

    3 cups brown sugar
    3 cups lemon juice
    1 cup water
    ½-1 tablespn. salt

Flavor with celery salt or seed, ground coriander or anise seed, and
raisins to taste. (Use anise seed sparingly). The cucumbers may be
steamed tender, put into jars and the reduced syrup poured over.

Watermelon rind may be prepared the same.

=To Dry Blueberries=

For buns, puddings and cakes.

    1 qt. berries
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    1 teaspn. water

Mix, heat in preserving kettle until juice begins to exude. Spread on
buttered plates, dry carefully, stirring often.

I prize this recipe highly, as all will, I am sure, after trying it.
Cherries, peaches and pears are better with sugar sprinkled over them
before drying.

Dried fruits make a pleasant change from canned ones, besides not
requiring jars. Home-dried fruit far excels factory products.


TO CAN VEGETABLES

While vegetables require a little more care than fruit in canning, if
they receive that care one will be rewarded with nice fresh canned
vegetables, free from harmful preservatives, all through the winter.

In the first place, vegetables must be fresh, especially corn and peas.
Corn gathered early in the morning ought to be in the cans and on the
fire before noon, and peas the same day.

If one is alone with all the housework to do, it is better to put up a
few jars at a time.

Always use new rubbers on jars in canning vegetables.

“Blanching”, in this connection, means a short boiling in a weak brine
(¼ cup of salt to 3 qts. of water) and is used with vegetables to
eliminate the acids which they contain.

Place the vegetables in a wire basket or a cloth bag and dip into the
boiling brine, then into cold water.

Prepare nearly all vegetables as for the table, before blanching, (okra
and corn are exceptions).

After blanching, pack as close as possible in jars. Fill jars to
overflowing with water with or without salt, according to special
directions; fasten covers on tight (do not be afraid the jars will
burst), and set into a kettle or boiler with a board containing holes
or with several thicknesses of cloth or with thin tin rings underneath.
Surround jars ¾ their depth with water, cover the vessel close so
that the steam will be retained, bring to the boiling point and boil
rapidly and continuously the required length of time.

Use wrench for tightening covers of Mason jars during the cooking.
If Lightning jars do not seem to be air-tight, thin bits of wood may
be placed under the wires. With corn and peas, it is better to have
the water deep enough to cover the jars, for boiling after tops are
tightened.

Invert jars after removing from the water, cover to exclude light, cool.

Store in dark, rather cool place.

Use cold water to surround jars at first if contents are cold and warm
water if contents are warm.

The length of time given is for cooking quart jars. ½-1 hour less will
be required for pints and 1 hour more for 2 quarts.

_Asparagus_--Prepare asparagus as for the table; blanch tips 3 m.,
other parts 5 m., dip in cold water, pack in jars--the tips in one, the
middle of the stalks in a second, and the inferior ends for soups, in a
third.

Fill jars with cold water to which salt has been added in the
proportion of 1 teaspn. to the quart.

Fasten covers and cook according to general directions for two hours,
tighten covers and cook for one hour longer.

_Asparagus in Full Lengths_--Place stalks in jars, heads up, and pack
as close as possible.

_To Use_--Open jar, add ½ teaspn. salt, set jar in cold or lukewarm
water, heat to boiling, pour water off (save for soups), and draw
stalks out carefully on to slices of prepared toast.

_Shelled Beans_--Follow directions for canning asparagus.

_String Beans_--Prepare as for the table or leave whole, blanch for 2
m., and follow directions for canning asparagus, using water without
salt to fill the jars.

_Greens_--Narrow dock, milkweed, pigweed, purslane or spinach. Wash the
greens thoroughly, drop into boiling salted water and leave just long
enough to wilt. Remove from water with skimmer, pack into jars, cover
with cold salted water and proceed as with other vegetables.

There are no vegetables that we enjoy more in winter than our “greens.”

_Okra_--Wash young tender okra, cut off stems and tops, blanch 10 m.,
dip in cold water, cut in transverse slices or leave whole, and finish
the same as asparagus.

_Peas_--Blanch fresh-gathered, mature, but not old peas, for 5 m. (old
for 8 m.), dip in cold water, proceed as for canning asparagus, using
sugar, 1 teaspn. to quart of water if peas are not sweet. Boil 3-4 hrs.
in all; 1 hr. after tightening covers, with water covering jars if
possible.

_Corn_--Prepare fresh-gathered corn as for drying. Pack at once
(filling all spaces) in clean jars to within an inch of the top, cover
to the depth of a half inch with slightly salted water, fasten covers
on as tight as possible, cook 3 or 4 hours, screw covers down again,
cover jars with boiling water and boil for 1 hour longer. Remove boiler
from fire and let jars cool in the water.

Ears of corn may be boiled in clear water 5 m. and dropped in cold
water before removing kernels.

_Corn No. 2_--Prepare as in preceding recipe and cook for 1 hr. after
the water is boiling; tighten covers, invert and leave until the next
day. Cook for 1 hr. the second day and again the third day, that is, 1
hr. each for three consecutive days.

_Beets_--Boil small dark red beets for 30 m., drop into cold water and
rub the skins off. Place in jars, cover with cold water, fasten covers,
boil 1 hr., tighten covers and boil for 1 hr. longer.

_Mushrooms_--Pour boiling salted water over mushrooms and allow them to
stand in a warm place until withered; cool, drain, pack close in jars
and cover with the water in which they were standing; seal and cook 1½
hr. Tighten covers and cook ½ hr. longer. Invert jars until cool.


TO DRY VEGETABLES

_Corn_--Boil corn 2-5 m., score down the center of each row of grains
with a sharp knife. With a large sharp knife cut off the thinnest
possible layer from each two rows, then with a dull case-knife scrape
out the pulp from the hulls on the cob. Mix pulp with that which was
cut off, spread on plates or granite pans and dry in a warm oven,
stirring often. If the oven is too warm, the corn will turn dark. Corn
may be dried in the sun if it is hot, but must be brought in before the
dew begins to fall and spread out in the house. It is better to dry a
little at a time in the oven and have it out of the way in a few hours.
With proper care it can be done in an afternoon.

When dry, put at once into dry clean jars and seal, or into paper sacks
tied tight so that no insects can get at it.

With care to keep it from souring, the corn may be dried without
cooking.

Any dried corn has a richer flavor than canned corn, but words are
inadequate to express how rich and fine flavored the yellow sweet corn
is when dried.

Corn for drying should be nice and tender; a little younger, if
anything, than for cooking green.

Directions for cooking dried corn are among the vegetables.

_Shelled Beans_--Lima and all green beans may be dried after shelling
by being spread out in a dry, airy place and stirred occasionally, and
are quite different in flavor from dry, ripened beans.

_String Beans_--Cook beans until half done; drain, dry in sun, pack in
paper bags, keep in cool place. To cook--soak over night, cook shorter
time than usual.

_Mushrooms_--String mushroom caps, also stems, on a cord the same as
apples, for drying, hang in sun and wind until just before the dew
begins to fall and finish drying over the stove, or, dry entirely over
the stove.

Put into dry, close covered jars or thick paper sacks. (May wrap in
waxed paper before putting into sacks). Keep in dry place.

When first dried, mushrooms may be pulverized in a mortar and the
powder put into clean, dry jars. It is delightful for flavoring soups
and sauces.

=String Beans in Brine=

Put layer of salt 1 in. deep in bottom of stone jar or cask; then a
layer of nice, tender string beans 3 in. deep; continue layers until
cask is full. Cover beans with a board a little smaller around than
the inside of the cask or jar and put a heavy stone on it so that the
beans will be well covered with the brine. The beans may be put in at
different times, but must be covered with the board from the first.

_To Cook_--Soak over night in cold water, changing the water several
times in the early part of the evening. Cook the same as fresh beans,
changing the water once or twice while cooking.

They are as nice and fresh as when picked.

=Corn in Brine=

Put layers of fresh picked corn, cut from the cob, in crock the same
as string beans except that the layers of corn should be 1 to 2 in.
deep only, and salt ½ in. deep. Have the top layer of salt, and thicker
than the others and keep the corn well under the brine with a board and
stone.

Soak over night for cooking, changing the water 2 or 3 times. Cook in
unsalted water.




SOUPS


“The more liquid there is taken into the stomach with the meals, the
more difficult it is for the food to digest, for the liquid must first
be absorbed.”

Consequently, the most perfect hygiene in the use of soups, would call
for a few sips only, at the beginning of the meal, which in some cases
stimulates the flow of the digestive juices.

With a hearty dinner of other foods, a small portion of some light soup
or broth should be served, while a legume soup a chowder or a purée may
make the principal dish of the meal.

We seldom make a soup after a recipe. When we serve soups every day, we
purposely cook more than is required for other dishes of such things as
will make good ingredients for soups; or, if used occasionally only,
we make soup at a time when there are left-overs that are suitable. We
get better results from these combinations, both from the variety of
flavors, and because, with few exceptions, reheating develops richer
flavors in foods.

“Our Famous Soups” are some that we have made, at different times,
after this plan.

Under the head of soups are classed, bouillons or consommés, bisques,
purées and chowders; though some of them are not soups in the strictest
sense. For instance, a chowder is often made of the consistency of a
stew, with a small proportion of liquid, and, as Francatelli says,
“a purée is a kind of pulpy maceration of legumes, vegetables, etc.,
which have been passed through a fine colander,” but both of these are
sometimes made with a larger proportion of liquid and served as thick
soups.

The word “bisque” means rich soup, so in using it we do not say “tomato
bisque soup” because the word soup is comprehended in bisque.

Bouillons (_boo-yon´_ or _bool-yon´_) or consommés are broths.


Suggestions

Do not put everything through the colander, (celery and oyster plant,
never). Mastication in connection with soups is an aid to their
digestion as well as being more satisfying.

Use potatoes seldom in any but potato soups; potato water, not at all.
The addition of potatoes to an otherwise wholesome soup might convert
it into a fermentable combination: as well as to remove it from the
dietary of those who cannot use starchy foods.

Cook turnips and carrots by themselves and drain before adding to
soups. The flavor of turnip in soup is often disagreeable.

Utilize the food cutter in preparing vegetables for soups.

As a rule, use oyster plant in slices, ¼ in. thick in the largest part
and a little thicker toward the end; but if desired fine, grind it
before cooking. In this way it retains its characteristic flavor.

Often the best way to thicken a soup is to heat the flour in oil or
butter (without browning) and add some of the hot soup to it as for
gravy, so avoiding a scorched taste.

Dried mushrooms washed well, soaked 2 to 4 hours, simmered 5 m., cut
fine and added, with their juice, give a fine flavor to many soups.
Three or four small pieces are sufficient for 1½ to 2 qts. of soup.

Always keep a quantity of consommé or bouillon on hand, for soups or
sauces, or to pour over hash, or chopped potatoes, or to moisten roasts.

Serve bouillon or consommé in cups with or without the beaten white of
egg in teaspoonfuls on each.

Whipped cream may be added to bouillon just before serving or dropped
by teaspoonfuls on the cups, with a leaf of parsley laid on each.

When soups are lacking in character, the addition of water and salt
will develop a meaty flavor, relieving the “porridgy” taste.

Raw nut butter may be added to any of the combinations of vegetables in
the proportion of 1 or 1½ tablespns. to each quart of soup.

The water drained from boiled peanuts may be used in place of raw nut
butter, taking care not to use too much.

If you should have the thick nut stock, use not more than 2 tablespns.
to each quart of soup.

Use herbs sparingly, some, such as mint and thyme, in minute quantities.

In putting corn through a colander, first crush the kernels in a pan
or grind them through a food cutter, and put a very little into the
colander at a time.

Use poor or top parts of stalks of celery, crushed, for flavoring soups.

Okra is a valuable addition to some soups, tomato soups especially.
When using it, take about ¼ less water for the soup, and add from ¼-½
of a pint can to each pint of soup. Heat carefully and serve at once.

The water from spinach is an invaluable addition to vegetable soups,
and with the addition of a little cream it alone makes a delightful
broth. The water from nearly all greens is desirable in soups.

A little stewed asparagus adds very much to any vegetable soup or
chowder.

If soup has thickened by standing, add water or milk before serving.


WATER SOUPS

=★ Nut Bouillon=

    1½ tablespn. raw nut butter
    3-4 tablespns. chopped onion
    ½ cup strained tomato
    2-3½ teaspns. browned flour
    1-1¼ teaspn. salt
    1 qt. water

Rub the nut butter smooth with part of the water, simmer all
ingredients together 1½-2 hrs., strain vegetables out, add water to
make 1¼ qt., heat, serve.

_To Clear_--Add water for one quart only, cool, beat with the white and
shell of one egg, set over a slow fire and stir often until the broth
boils rapidly, then boil without stirring until it looks dark and clear
below the scum. Let stand off the fire about 10 m., strain through 2
or 3 thicknesses of cheese cloth laid over a colander; pour through
wire strainer on to the cheese cloth. Add more water if necessary after
straining, to develop a meaty flavor. Reheat, serve.

=★ Vegetable Consommé=

With or without 2-3 tablespns. raw nut butter or soup stock.

    1-2 large onions, sliced
    ¼ cup dried celery tops pressed down
    2 large bay leaves
    2 large tomatoes or ½-⅔ cup stewed tomato
    ¼ level teaspn. thyme
    1 level tablespn. browned flour
    2-3 cloves garlic, if desired
    2½-3 teaspns. salt
    2 qts. water

Cook together 1-2 hours, strain, add water to make 2 quarts, more salt
if necessary, heat, serve.

=★ Vegetable Consommé, No. 2=

Omit browned flour and garlic in preceding recipe, substitute celery
salt for celery tops, and add a trifle of sage.

=White Stock=

    ¼ cup raw nut butter or meal
    1 large onion, sliced
    1½ level teaspn. celery salt or seed
    ¼ level teaspn. powdered sage
    ⅛ level teaspn. thyme
    1 medium bay leaf
    1½-2 teaspns. salt
    2-3 qts. water

Mix dry ingredients, add nut butter which has been stirred with water,
simmer all together 1½-2 hours, strain, and add water to make 2½ pints,
heat, serve.

=Dark Stock=

    ¼ cup raw nut butter or meal
    1 medium bay leaf
    1 level teaspn. celery salt
    ½ level teaspn. powdered sage
    ¼ level teaspn. thyme
    1 level tablespn. salt
    1 level tablespn. browned flour
    1 cup sliced onion
    1 clove garlic
    2½ qts. water
    ½ cup strained tomato

Finish the same as white stock, leaving 2½ pts. of stock.

=Vegetable Stock=

    ¼ cup each beans and split peas
    1 each medium onion and carrot, sliced
    1 stalk celery or ¼ cup celery tops or ¼ teaspn. celery seed or salt
    1-2 tablespns. chopped parsley
    ⅛ level teaspn. thyme
    ½ level teaspn. leaf sage or ¼ powdered
    Salt

Simmer all together 3-4 hours; strain, serve. Parsley may be added
after straining soup. Savory, marjoram and other herbs may be used, or
the herbs may be omitted altogether.

Other legumes may be substituted for the ones given. Tomato or browned
flour or both may be added. This stock is excellent for gravies and
sauces. A thick soup may be made by rubbing the vegetables through the
colander instead of straining them out.

=★ Cereal Bouillon=

2½ pts. nice fresh bran pressed down. 2½ qts. boiling water. Simmer
together 2 hours or more; strain, add

    1 pint strained tomato
    1 bunch celery stalks, crushed
    1 large onion, sliced
    ¼ teaspn. powdered mint in a muslin bag

Simmer together ½-1 hour, strain, salt to taste, heat, serve. This
should make 2½ qts. of soup. Other flavorings maybe used.

In using the bran put up in packages, sift it and use only the coarse
part.

=Tomato Broth=

    1 qt. stewed tomato
    1 onion, sliced
    1 bay leaf
    salt
    1 pt. water

Simmer all together about 20 m., strain and add water for 1½ qt. of
broth. Use plenty of salt. This broth may be cleared the same as
bouillon, leaving 1 qt. only. 3 or 4 teaspoons of browned flour may be
used.

=Legume Broths=

Cook beans, lentils or whole green peas, until the water looks rich,
but not until the skins begin to break. Strain, making 1 pt. of broth
from each pint of legumes. (The legumes remaining may be used for stews
and soups). Add salt, heat and serve. These broths are very satisfying.
They may be varied by adding different flavorings to legumes while
cooking or to broths after straining. Tomato, celery, onion with or
without browned flour, or thyme are suitable. Brown beans with onion
have quite a different flavor from white beans with onion.

=★ Nut French Soup=

    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    2 cups stewed tomato
    6 cups water
    ½ tablespn. browned flour
    ½ large onion, sliced
    1 large bay leaf
    ¼ teaspn. powdered sage
    ¼ teaspn. thyme
    2½-3 teaspns. salt

Simmer ½-1 hour, strain, reheat, serve. An English woman in sampling
this soup after I had made it up, remarked that it tasted like some of
the French soups, hence its name.

=Egg Soup=

Add salt and butter to water, break eggs into a cup, one for each cup
of water, leave whole and turn slowly into the rapidly boiling water,
beating briskly with fork or wire whip until the egg is in white and
yellow shreds. Boil up well and serve with crackers and celery. This is
an emergency soup. Cream may be added to the water instead of butter,
or part milk may be used.

=★ Nut and Barley Soup=

    4 tablespns. raw nut butter
    2 qts. water
    2½ tablespns. coarse pearl barley
    ½ bay leaf
    2 small sticks celery, or a few celery tops
    2½-3 teaspns. salt

Cook barley and nut butter in part of the water for 3-5 hours. Add
water to make 2 qts., with celery and bay leaf. Simmer from 15-20 m.,
no longer. Remove celery and bay leaf, serve. Bay leaf may be omitted.

=★ Cabbage and Tomato Soup=

Cook chopped or finely-shredded cabbage in boiling salted water until
tender; add stewed tomatoes, simmer 15-20 m., add necessary salt and
water, serve. Excellent.

=★ Celery and Tomato Soup=

Use stewed celery instead of cabbage in cabbage and tomato soup. A
delightful combination.

=★ Savory Rice Soup=

    4 tablespns. raw nut butter
    2 qts. water
    2½ tablespns. rice
    1 teaspn. chopped onion
    ⅛-¼ teaspn. sage
    2½ teaspns. salt

Blend nut butter and water. Heat to boiling, add rice, onion, sage and
salt. Boil rapidly until rice is tender.

It may be necessary to add 1-2 cups of water after rice is cooked.

=Onion Soup=

Simmer sliced onions in butter without browning; add water, boiling,
cook until onions are tender, thicken slightly with flour, rub through
colander, add salt and a little browned flour, more water if necessary,
and chopped parsley.

May cook raw nut butter with onion instead of using dairy butter.

=Split Peas and Onion Soup=

Split peas, water, salt, raw nut butter and onion, a little tomato
sometimes. Cook all ingredients together until peas and onion are
tender. Strain or not as preferred.

=Potato Soup with Onion or Celery=

Simmer chopped onion in oil or butter, add boiling water, potatoes cut
in small pieces, and salt. Cook until potatoes are tender, add water to
make of the right consistency, salt, and chopped parsley.

Serve with shelled nuts and croutons.

Finely-sliced celery may be cooked with the potatoes, and onions
omitted.

=Vegetable Soup No. 1=

    1 cup each carrot, turnip and parsnip in small pieces
    2 cups each onion and celery
    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    2 qts. boiling water
    salt
    ½ cup rice

Cook all except rice for ½ hour, add rice and cook until it is tender;
add 1 tablespn. parsley, more salt and water if necessary.

=Vegetable Soup No. 2=

Equal quantities carrot and turnip in small pieces, twice as much onion
and celery, with raw nut butter and water. Cook until vegetables are
tender; add salt and necessary water. In their season, asparagus, peas,
and string beans may be added.

=Vegetable Soup No. 3=

Simmer sliced onions, celery or carrots and cabbage in water, with raw
nut butter, until tender. Add browned flour, salt and necessary water;
heat.

Mashed legumes may be used in place of nut butter in these vegetable
soups. Or they may be made into cream soups by using milk instead of
nut butter and water, with or without thickening. Chopped parsley may
be used in any of them.

=Tomato Soup=

    1 tablespn. oil or butter
    2 tablespns. flour
    1 teaspn. salt
    1 pt. boiling water
    1 qt. stewed tomatoes

Add flour to melted butter in saucepan, pour boiling water over,
stirring, add tomatoes and salt. Boil up well.

Chopped onion may be simmered in the oil before adding flour.

=Nut Gumbo=

    3-4 tablespns. raw nut butter
    1⅔ qt. water
    ⅔ cup nutmese in small oblong pieces
    ⅓ cup trumese in small oblong pieces
    ⅔ pt. stewed or canned okra
    ⅔ cup finely-sliced celery, stewed
    1 tablespn. rice, cooked
    ½ tablespn. chopped parsley
    salt

Cook raw nut butter in part of the water, add other ingredients, heat
well. Cooked noodles may be used instead of rice.

=★ Tampa Bay Soup=

    1 tablespn. oil
    1 tablespn. flour
    ½ tablespn. browned flour
    1 cup boiling water
    1 cup stewed tomato
    3 tablespns. raw nut butter
    1-1¼ qt. water
    ½ cup sliced okra
    ½ cup sliced onion
    ½ cup trumese in dice
    ¼ cup nutmese in dice
    chopped parsley

Cook tomato, raw nut butter, the 1¼ qt. of water, okra and onion all
together, rub through colander and add to sauce made with oil, browned
and white flour and the 1 cup of water. Add salt and more water if
necessary, and when boiling, the trumese and nutmese, with chopped
parsley. Throw egg balls into the soup just before serving, or serve
separately in each dish. Or, pass a dish of boiled rice with the soup.

=★ Mother’s Soup=

    1 qt. clean wheat bran pressed down in the measure
    3 qts. boiling water
    2 large onions, sliced or chopped
    ¼ cup grated carrot
    1 bay leaf
    1-2 tablespns. browned flour
    ½ cup chopped turnip
    ⅛ teaspn. thyme
    salt

Cook all except turnip and thyme together 1½-2 hours. About 20 m.
before removing from the fire add the turnip, and in 10 m. the thyme;
after another 10 m., strain, add salt and more water if necessary, heat.

When soup is boiling rapidly, turn in slowly, in a slender stream,
batter for cream noodles, stirring constantly. Boil up well, remove
from fire, serve at once.

3-4 tablespns. raw nut butter may be used for stock instead of bran,
and 1½ teaspn. lemon juice added when soup is done.

=★ Bean Soup=

Put the beans into boiling water and cook rapidly until the skins begin
to break, then simmer until tender and well dried out. The longer and
more slowly the beans are cooked the richer the soup will be. Rub beans
through colander, keeping them where they will remain hot during the
process. Return to the fire, add boiling water and salt, and simmer for
an hour. Stir well and serve.

There are three things essential to the perfection of bean soup: 1st.,
cook the beans without soaking or parboiling, 2nd., dry out well after
they become tender, 3rd., do not let the beans or soup get cold at any
time before serving. Warmed-over bean soup is very good, but there is a
certain meaty flavor lost by cooling and reheating. Left-overs of bean
soup, we usually combine with other ingredients. Brown beans and red
make very rich soups, much better than black. One pint of beans will
make about 3 qts. of soup.

=★ Chick Peas Soup=

Make the same as bean soup (except that peas require longer cooking),
or cook in consommé. Very rich in flavor.

=★ Unstrained Bean Soup=

Cook nice tender white beans until partially cooked to pieces. Add
salt, and water to make of the right consistency, and simmer slowly ½
hour or longer.

=★ Swiss Lentil Soup=

    1 pint lentils
    1 large onion
    2-4 tablespns. browned flour
    salt

Cook lentils and sliced onion together until lentils are tender and
well dried out, rub through colander, add the browned flour and salt,
with water to make of the right consistency. (There should be from 2½-3
qts. of soup). Heat ½-1 hour. This makes an unusually meaty-flavored
soup.

The idea of combining onion and browned flour with lentils was given me
by one who had spent some years among the French in Switzerland.

=Swiss Peas or Swiss Bean Soup=--May be made the same.

=★ Canadian Peas Soup=

Cook whole ripe peas with onion and a little garlic, rub through
colander, add salt, a little browned flour and powdered sage, with
water to make like a broth. Unusually good.

=★ Green Peas Soup=

Cook green peas until tender, put ¾ of them through the colander, add
water and salt, boil up, thicken with a little flour and butter rubbed
together, add the whole peas, heat to boiling and serve.


CREAM AND MILK SOUPS

Cream soups do not necessarily contain cream, though the addition of a
little improves their flavor.

The simplest ones consist of milk thickened to the consistency of very
thin cream, salt, and a vegetable or some other ingredient. If the
vegetable is mashed, or is one that does not break to pieces easily,
the milk may be added to it, and the whole brought to the boiling point
and thickened. In a few exceptional cases the ingredient may be cooked
in the milk; nice tender green corn, for instance.

A richer sauce is made by making a roux of 2 level tablespns. of
butter, and 1-1½ level tablespn. flour, with a pint of milk, put
together in the regular way for sauces; but you will be surprised to
see how much better soups (with few exceptions) are without thickening,
being free from the porridgy taste of those thickened a trifle too much.

A little cream with the water in which the vegetable was cooked often
gives a finer flavored soup than milk and is no more expensive.

Sour cream makes a delightful as well as wholesome substitute for sweet
cream in corn, cabbage, tomato, in fact, nearly all vegetable soups.

_The following is a list of soups in which the general directions are
understood when no exceptions are noted. Salt is understood in all._

=★ Cream of Asparagus=--Cook tougher parts and rub through colander.
Throw cooked tips in last unless desired for some other dish. The very
toughest parts only make a nice, delicate flavored soup. This is one
which favors cream and water instead of milk.

=Cream of Bean=--Lima, common white, or colored. Cook as for water bean
soup, rub through colander or leave in broken pieces. Milk, or cream
and water, no flour. 1 cup beans to 1½-2 qts. soup.

=Cream of Bouillon=--¼-½ cup cream salted and whipped, to each quart
bouillon just before serving, either stirred in, or laid on top of each
cup in spoonfuls with a leaf of parsley.

=★ Cream of Cabbage, or Celery and Tomato=--Cabbage or celery, and
tomato soup, with a little heavy cream added.

=Cream of Carrot=--1 cup of ground or grated carrot, cooked, 3 pts.
milk and water, 1½-2 tablespns. butter, 1¼ tablespn. flour; or, 1 cup
strained tomato, ½-¾ cup cream, with water to make 3 pts., and no
butter.

Without the tomato, soup may be flavored with onion or celery, and bay
leaf, with chopped parsley.

=Cream of Celery=--1 pt. finely-sliced celery, stewed, milk and cream
added to make 3 pts., 1-1½ tablespn. flour with or without 1 or 2
tablespns. of butter. Do not strain. When soup is thickened, crushed
stalks of celery may be steeped in it for 15 m., then removed.

=★ Cream of Celery No. 2=--Steep leaves or poor stalks of celery in
milk for 15 m., add cream and flour, or flour and butter, to make of
the consistency of thin cream. Strain. May add a little celery salt.

=Cream of Chestnut=--Mashed boiled chestnuts, milk to thin, cream,
plain or whipped, or, milk and butter. May be flavored with celery or
onion or both.

=★ Cream of Corn=--1 pt. canned or grated corn to 3 pts. rich milk, 1
level tablespn. only, of flour, a very little salt. Do not let soup
stand long before serving. A little onion improves the flavor. If fresh
corn is used, the milk may be heated in a double boiler, the corn
added and cooked 20-30 m., or it may be boiled in a small quantity of
water 6-10 m. The cobs may be boiled in the water for 10 m. before
and removed; or they may stand in the milk while it is heating and be
removed before corn is added.

Fine fresh cracker meal gives a nice flavor to cream of corn soup when
used instead of flour for thickening.

A very little strained tomato imparts a delightful flavor and makes a
different soup.

=Cream of Dried Corn=--Soak corn, grind, add to hot milk, or cream and
water. Heat in double boiler 1 hour, add salt, serve. If necessary,
thicken a trifle.

=Cream of Dried Corn and Carrot=--Add cooked grated carrots to corn and
milk in above recipe and heat. Delicious.

=Cream of Leek=--Boil sliced leeks to pulp or cook only until tender.

=Cream of Lentil=--1 cup lentils cooked and rubbed through colander.
1½-2 qts. soup. No flour. May flavor with celery and onion.

=Cream of Onion=--Cook sliced onions in salted water. Do not strain.
Nice thickened with tapioca instead of flour.

=Cream of Oyster Plant=--Cook sliced oyster plant in water until just
tender, not soft; add salt, simmer 5 m. Add cream and more water if
necessary. Or, grind oyster plant before cooking. May thicken a trifle.

=Cream of Peas, dry=--Canadian, dried green, split or chick; 1 cup
to 1½-2 qts. of soup. Cook, rub through colander; milk, or cream and
water. No flour. Celery or onion flavor or not.

=Cream of Potato, or Sweet Potato=--1½-2 qts. of milk, or cream and
water, for each pint of mashed potato. Flavor with onion, celery salt
or bay leaf.

=Cream of Spinach=--Use a very small proportion of cooked spinach
rubbed through a colander, with rich milk, or with cream and the water
in which the spinach was boiled. Whipped cream may be added just before
serving. Thicken with tapioca sometimes.

=Cream of String Beans=--Cook beans in small pieces, add rich milk,
thicken with flour or tapioca.

=Cream of Succotash Soup=

Use 1 part of beans to 2 parts of corn; put either, neither or both
through a colander; add rich milk and salt.

For variety, flavor the soup with celery or onion or both, and add a
sprinkling of chopped parsley just before serving.

=Cream of Corn and Celery Soup=

Equal quantities cooked celery and corn, rich milk thickened a trifle
if desired, salt.

=Cream of Corn and Peas Soup=

    1 cup dried green peas
    1 cup canned corn
    2 or 3 stalks of celery
    milk

Cook peas, rub through colander, corn also if preferred. Add milk to
make of the right consistency. Put over fire in double boiler with salt
and the stalks of celery crushed. Heat for 15 m., remove the celery and
serve. 1 pint of canned green peas may be used instead of dried ones.

=Okra Soup with Cream=

1 pt. canned okra, vegetable consommé to make of the right consistency,
½-1 cup cream, salt. If the okra is in large pieces, cut smaller.

=Cream of Rice Soup=

    ½ cup rice
    1½ teaspn. salt
    1½ pint water
    1¾ pt. milk
    ½ cup cream

Cook rice with salt and water in a double boiler or in a pan in the
oven until the water is absorbed, add the milk hot, and cook stirring
often, on top of stove or in double boiler till rice is soft and
creamy. Add cream and more salt and water if necessary. Soup may be
flavored with 2 teaspns. finely-chopped onion, a crushed half clove of
garlic, or ⅛-¼ teaspn. sage, or with a bay leaf, or crushed stalks of
celery. All milk may be used.

=★ Paris Onion Soup=

Cook sliced onion with browned flour in salted water until tender. Rub
through colander, add cream or butter, milk and salt. Thicken a trifle,
heat and add chopped parsley.

=Soup of Peas Pods=

Wash peas pods, stew 3 hours with a small sprig of mint. Rub through
a coarse wire sieve (a few at a time) until nothing is left but the
membrane. Add milk and butter, or cream and water, with a little flour
to thicken if desired, then a few whole peas; season with salt.

=Split Peas Soup=

1 pt. split peas, 1 onion sliced; cook in water till soft. Add milk to
make of the right consistency and salt to season. Good without onion.

=★ Peas and Tomato Soup=

    1 cup dried green peas (2 cups after being cooked and mashed)
    1¼ qt. water
    2-4 cups tomato
    ½ cup cream
    Salt

Cook peas and rub through colander, add water, tomato, cream and salt.
Heat. Serve.

=Cream of Green (or canned) Peas Soup=

1 pt. stewed or canned, well matured green peas, 1-1½ qt. rich milk,
salt. Heat peas, rub through colander, add hot milk gradually,
stirring, then salt. Heat well, serve. If peas are not sweet, 2
teaspoons of sugar may be added. The soup may be thickened with 1 level
tablespn. of flour. It also may be flavored with stalks of celery or
slices of onion, for variety; but nice-flavored peas do not require any
additional flavoring.

=★ Tomato Cream Soup=

    1 qt. rich milk
    1-1½ tablespn. flour
    1 cup strained tomato
    1 teaspn. salt

Heat milk, thicken with flour, add tomato, then salt; serve hot.

=Cream of Tomato Soup=

Same as Tomato Cream Soup, with 2½ cups of tomato instead of 1 cup, and
1½-2 teaspns. salt.

=★ Another=

    1 tablespn. butter
    1 level tablespn. flour
    1 cup water
    1 cup milk
    1 cup strained tomato
    ⅔ teaspn. salt

Heat butter, add flour, then water, milk, tomato and salt, stirring
smooth.

=Cream Broths=

Cauliflower, cabbage or spinach water, with a little cream, make
delightful broths; also barley or rice water or juice of tomato.

=Brazil Nut Soup=

    ½ lb. (1 large cup) ground Brazil nut meats
    1-1½ pt. water
    1 cup chopped onion
    1½ cup finely-sliced celery (crushed stalks of celery may be used)
    2 cups milk
    Salt

Cook ground nuts in the water for 2 hrs., add onion and celery, and
cook 15 m., to ½ hr., add the milk, heat, strain, add salt and more
milk or water if necessary, reheat. Other flavorings may be used.

This may be used as a white stock with or without the milk.

=Sister Cooley’s Brown Potato Soup=

1 pt. of potato, in small pieces, cooked, mashed and well beaten, 3
tablespns. butter and oil mixed, 4-6 tablespns. chopped onion, 2 or 3
teaspns. browned flour, 1½ teaspn. white flour, 3 cups milk, salt. Heat
onion in oil, add flour and mashed potato, then milk and salt with a
little chopped parsley. If too thick, add a little more milk or water.

=Sliced Potato Soup=

1 pt. of potato in thick slices, 1 medium sized onion chopped, salt.
Cook until potatoes are tender but not soft; add 1 tablespn. butter,
or 2-3 tablespns. cream with milk to make 1¼-1½ qt. of soup, salt, and
chopped parsley. Finely-sliced celery may be used in place of onion.

For parsnip soup substitute parsnip for half or all of the potato.

=Vegetable Soup--Milk=

    1½ tablespn. oil, or 2 tablespns. melted butter
    4 tablespns. finely-sliced celery
    2½ tablespns. chopped cabbage
    2½ tablespns. chopped carrot
    2 medium sized onions sliced thin
    scant ½ cup stale bread crumbs
    2 cups boiling water
    1½ cup milk
    salt
    1 tablespn. parsley

Simmer, but do not brown, vegetables in oil 10-20 m., add boiling water
and bread crumbs and cook till vegetables are very tender. Rub through
colander or not as preferred. Add milk, salt and parsley. Reheat. If
too thick add more milk or water. Soup may be thickened slightly with
pastry or rice flour instead of crumbs.

=Mayflower Soup=

    3 level tablespns (¼ cup) raw nut butter or meal
    1 cup each tomato, onion and corn
    2 cloves garlic
    1 tablespn. butter
    1-1½ tablespn. flour
    1 qt. milk
    salt
    ½ teaspn. celery salt

Cook nut butter, onion and garlic in salted water; when tender add
tomato and corn; heat. Rub butter and flour together, pour hot milk
over gradually, stirring. Boil up well, combine with vegetables, add
salt and celery salt, and if necessary, water to thin.

A little cream may be used in place of butter, but the soup is
excellent without either.

=★ Oyster Bay Soup=

    1 qt. sliced oyster plant (about 20 roots, 3 bunches or less)
    1-1½ pt. chopped cabbage
    1 pt. milk
    ¼-½ pt. cream
    1-1½ tablespn. flour
    2-2½ teaspns. salt
    ½-1 teaspn. olive oil

Cook oyster plant in 1½ pt. water; when nearly tender, add salt. Cook
cabbage till tender (20-25 m.), in so little water that it will be
nearly dry when done. Add milk, heat, strain; add liquid from oyster
plant. There should be 3 pts. of liquid in all. Boil, stir in flour
rubbed smooth with the oil and part of the cold milk. Boil up well.
Add cooked oyster plant. Heat. Do not make too thick. The flour may be
omitted entirely. The oil may be cooked with the oyster plant.

=Milk Stew of Cabbage--White or Red=

    1 pt. chopped cabbage
    1 tablespn. chopped onion
    1 pt. water
    2 level tablespns. butter
    1½ level tablespn. flour
    1 pt. boiling milk
    chopped parsley

Cook cabbage and onion in the water 20-25 m. leaving ½ pt. of liquid.
Blend butter and flour and pour hot milk over; boil, add cooked cabbage
and chopped parsley. Heat. Serve.

=Milk Stew of Oyster Plant=

Cook 1 qt. of sliced oyster plant in a small quantity of water. Add
salt when nearly tender; drain, add rich milk to liquor to make 1 qt.
Pour over oyster plant, heat, add salt. Turn into tureen containing ¼
cup heavy cream, or 1 tablespn. butter.

=Cream Stew of Oyster Plant=

Cook oyster plant in water and add heavy cream.

=Oyster Plant and Celery Soup=

Equal quantities sliced oyster plant and celery cooked; water, cream,
with or without a little flour to thicken, salt.

=Oyster Plant and Corn Soup=

    ⅔ qt. (1 bunch) sliced oyster plant
    ¼ cup corn
    3½ cups water
    ¾-1 tablespn. flour
    ½ cup cream, salt

Cook oyster plant, drain, add water to liquor to make 3½ cups. When
boiling, thicken and add corn, oyster plant and cream, with salt. Heat,
serve.


BISQUES

=Bisque of Corn=

    1 pt. corn
    2½ pts. water
    1 tablespn. flour
    1-1½ tablespn. butter
    ½-¾ cup cream, whipped

Heat butter, add flour, then hot water; stir into corn with salt; heat,
turn over whipped cream in soup tureen and send to table at once.

Butter may be omitted, and the water thickened with flour.

=Bisque of Cucumber=

    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    1 pt. water, salted
    2 small onions, sliced
    4 large cucumbers, grated
    ½-1 teaspn. celery salt
    1 pt. rich milk
    1 level tablespn. flour
    ¼-½ cup cream
    salt

Cook onion in nut milk (made by blending raw nut butter and water)
until tender, add the cucumbers and cook 5 m., add celery salt and
milk, thicken with flour; rub through colander, add salt, milk or water
to thin if necessary, and cream, whipped or plain. Serve immediately.

=★ Milk and Tomato Bisque=

    1 pt. chopped cabbage
    1 pt. milk
    1 tablespn. butter
    2 teaspns. flour
    1 qt. stewed tomatoes, strained
    1 tablespn. flour
    ½ cup cream
    salt

Cook cabbage 20-25 m., in just enough water to cook it tender. Add
milk, heat, strain. Heat butter and the 2 teaspns. of flour and add
cabbage flavored milk.

Thicken tomato with 1 tablespn. of flour and add thickened milk just
before serving. Add salt the last thing. Turn over whipped cream in
soup tureen or serve the cream by teaspoonfuls on each plate of soup.
Cream may be omitted.

Milk may be flavored with onion instead of cabbage, or not flavored
at all, but the cabbage gives an exceptionally fine flavor to the
combination. Equal quantities of milk and tomato may be used, or twice
as much milk as tomato, remembering to thicken both milk and tomato (if
all the flour is put into the milk it makes it too thick to blend well
with the tomato), to combine just before serving, and to add the salt
last.

=Milk and Tomato Bisque, with Eggs--Starchless=

    1½ cup rich milk
    ½ cup water
    ½ tablespn. oil or melted butter
    2 eggs
    1 cup strained tomato
    salt

Cook milk, water, oil and eggs the same as a boiled custard. Remove
from fire, add the hot tomato gradually, stirring, then salt. Serve at
once.

=★ Nut and Tomato Bisque=

    ⅓ cup roasted nut butter
    1 cup rich strained tomato
    3 cups water
    salt

Stir butter smooth with tomato, add boiling water, heat and add plenty
of salt. This soup requires no flavoring, but onion, garlic, mint,
caraway, or a delicate flavoring of thyme, are all nice with it.

=★ Nut and Tomato Bisque No. 2=

2 tablespns. raw nut butter cooked in water ½ to 1 hr., instead of
the roasted nut butter. Flavor with onion, garlic, or delicately with
thyme, if desired.

=Bisque of Spinach=

    2 qts. spinach
    3 pts. milk
    1-1½ tablespn. oil or melted butter
    1½ tablespn. flour
    1½ tablespn. chopped onion
    1-3 stalks celery
    ¾ teaspn. celery salt
    salt

Heat milk, onion and celery in double boiler for 20 m., strain, pour
liquid over oil and flour heated (without browning) in saucepan; add
salt and celery salt and turn on to spinach (which has been cooked and
chopped fine or rubbed through a colander) gradually, stirring. Serve
hot.


CHOWDERS

Many of the chowders are almost a “full meal” in themselves. I can
think of no luncheon more delightful than a nut chowder with finger
croutons, beaten biscuit or whole wheat wafers, with fruit or other not
too rich, dessert.

Raw nut butter may be used in all these chowders in place of butter or
oil, giving a meaty flavor.

A smaller proportion of liquid may be used when desired. The vegetable
strainings left from a consommé, rubbed through the colander, make an
excellent foundation for chowders.

=★ Seashore Chowder--Corn=

    1 pt. to 1 qt. milk
    1 pt. water
    1 pt. corn grated or chopped
    2-3 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    5 small onions sliced
    1 qt. potato in small pieces (not slices)

Heat oil (without browning) in kettle, add onions, simmer 10 m., then
add the water, boiling, with salt and potatoes. Cook until potatoes
are just tender, not soft; add the milk, hot, and then the corn. Heat
to boiling and serve with crackers. When fresh grated corn is used,
of course it should be cooked in a double boiler for 10-15 m. before
adding to chowder.

The chowder may be thickened a trifle if the larger quantity of milk is
used, but the smaller is the usual quantity. Sometimes only one-half as
much potato as of corn is used.

Dried corn chopped after soaking makes an unusually fine chowder.

Water and cream are better than milk.

A little browned flour is thought by some to be an improvement.

Fine chopped trumese gives the chowder a little more of the seashore
effect.

=Corn and Carrot Chowder--Unusually Fine=

    1-1½ tablespn. oil or melted butter
    1 medium onion, sliced
    1 cup carrot in small, thin pieces
    1 pt. water
    ¾-1 cup corn
    2½-3 cups rich milk
    salt

Heat onion and carrot in oil, add water, cook tender, add hot milk, and
corn with salt. Heat.

½-¾ cup of tomato may be added for variety.

=★ Nut Chowder=

    2-3 tablespns. raw nut butter
    1 medium onion, sliced fine
    ½ cup carrot in small pieces (fancy shapes if convenient)
    ½ cup finely-sliced celery
    1 cup stewed tomato
    1 cup nutmese, shredded or in dice
    ½-1 cup trumese, shredded or in dice
    2 hard boiled eggs, shredded parsley,
	    chopped or picked into small pieces
    ½-1 cup cream
    water
    salt

Rub nut butter smooth with water, add the tomato and more water; cook ½
hour. Cook together carrots and onion and add without draining to nut
butter stock. Cook celery till perfectly tender and add with the water
in which it was cooked; add salt, nutmese and trumese, eggs, parsley
and cream, with more water if required. Let stand a few minutes and
serve.

One cup of oyster plant with the water in which it was cooked is a
great improvement. ½ cup of turnip in dice, cooked by itself and
drained, and a few pieces of cooked red beet, in fancy shapes, may be
added just as the chowder goes to the table.

=Potato and Onion or Celery Chowder=

    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    1 pt. potato in small pieces
    1 pt. water
    2 or 3 onions, sliced

Rub nut butter smooth with water, heat to boiling, add salt and onions,
cook 10 m., add potatoes and cook until tender. Finish with water and
cream, or water alone. 1 cup finely-sliced celery may be cooked with
the potato instead of the onion, and chopped parsley added at the last.

Nut butter may be omitted and cream used.

=★ Tomato Cream Chowder=

    2-3 tablespns. oil or butter
    2 large onions, sliced
    1 pt. stewed tomato
    1 pt. thin cream sauce
    Salt

Simmer onion, carefully, in oil until tender, add tomato, heat and
add cream sauce with necessary salt. Onion may be cooked in a small
quantity of salted water and oil omitted.

Add stewed celery for Celery and Tomato Chowder.

=★ Oyster Plant Chowder=

    1½ tablespn. oil or butter
    1 large onion, sliced
    1 pt. potato, in small pieces
    1 pt. oyster plant, partly cooked
    1½ pt. water (including that in which the oyster plant was cooked)
    1½ pt. rich milk or thin cream
    salt, crackers

Simmer onion in oil, add water, potato and oyster plant, with salt;
cook; add hot milk and more salt if necessary. Pour over split or whole
crackers in tureen.

=★ Another=

Leave out potato and use more oyster plant and onion.

=String Bean and Celery Chowder=

1 part cooked celery and 2 parts string beans with rich milk, thickened
a trifle. Salt.

=Celery, Onion and Corn Chowder=

Equal parts celery and corn. Cook onion and celery in butter (or salted
water only), add water, then milk and cream, corn and parsley. Heat.
Serve.

=Rice and Vegetable Chowder (of things on hand)=

    split peas soup
    string beans
    celery in tomato
    tomato and okra soup
    hard boiled eggs
    boiled rice

Slice hard boiled eggs, mix all ingredients, heat and serve.

=★ Royal Vegetable Chowder=

    a few mashed green or yellow split peas
    carrot
    onion
    canned peas
    canned asparagus tips
    tomato
    parsley
    milk, a little
    cream, a little

A little canned okra when convenient.


PURÉES

The term “purée,” as used in this connection, means a _thick soup_ of
ingredients rubbed through a fine colander. Thicker purées of cooked
nuts, fruits, legumes or vegetables are served as true meat dishes,
entrées, side dishes or relishes, according to their nature.

=Almond Purée--small quantity=

Very nourishing and digestible for invalids.

Rub 2 tablespns. of almond butter smooth with 1-1⅓ cup of water. Just
boil up over the fire (or cook in double boiler till thick), add salt,
serve. The proportion of water may be varied

=Split Peas Purée=

    1 cup split peas
    3-4 tablespns. raw nut butter
    ½ large bay leaf
    a few celery tops or ¼ teaspn. celery seed in piece of muslin
    a pinch of sage
    1 small onion, sliced
    salt
    water
    1 tablespn. butter
    ½ tablespn. flour
    1 teaspn. grated onion

Cook peas, raw nut butter, bay leaf, celery tops and onion all together
in salted water, rub through colander, turn on to butter and flour
which have been heated together (or the butter and flour may be rubbed
together and stirred into the purée), add necessary water, salt, sage
and the teaspoon of fresh grated onion; simmer for 5 m. Serve with
strips of bread, or finger croutons. The teaspoon of onion at the last
is very important.

=Purée of Potatoes=

Boil potatoes cut in small pieces, sliced onion, stalks of celery
and a sprig of parsley in plenty of salted water till potatoes are
tender. Rub through colander, reheat, thicken just enough to hold
the ingredients together, turn over whipped cream in the tureen and
sprinkle with chopped parsley. Raw nut butter gives a fine flavor to
this purée, cook it with the potatoes and use less or no cream.

=Purée of Sago=

    ¼ cup sago
    1 pt. water
    ¼ small bay leaf
    1 large stalk of celery, crushed, or a few celery tops
    1 medium onion, sliced
    a sprig of parsley
    1¼-1½ pt. milk
    salt
    yolk of 1 small egg
    ¼ cup cream
    chopped parsley if desired

Wash sago and cook with bay leaf, celery, parsley and onion in the
water until clear; add hot milk, rub through colander, add salt and
keep hot. Just before serving, beat together the yolk of the egg and
the cream, stir several spoonfuls of hot soup into the mixture, turn
all into the soup, stir well, but do not boil, add chopped parsley,
serve at once.


OUR FAMOUS SOUPS

This is the list of soups, made from left-overs, for which people most
often ask our recipes.

They are from a small institution, with a family of from twenty-five to
thirty members.

The cream is usually a little from the top of the can, but it gives the
finishing touch.

The ingredients are usually heated together and put through the
colander.

No. 1--Seashore chowder with fine trumese and nutmese, and onion and
tomato stew.

No. 2--Nut and tomato bisque, with remains of above, put through
colander.

No. 3--Asparagus on toast put through colander; milk, consommé, a
trifle of tomato,--oyster flavor.

No. 4--Consommé, strainings from consommé, chick peas, trumese and
gravy from trumese pie.

No. 5--Cream of asparagus soup, dry Lima beans and dried corn
succotash, consommé, baked beans, green peas, milk and cream.

No. 6--Baked beans, Lima beans, cream of peas soup, milk.

No. 7--Strainings from consommé, put through colander, thin cream,
tomato.

No 8--Left-overs from above, string beans, lentils, milk; thickened a
little.

No. 9--Consommé of nut butter instead of stock, lentils, water, cream.

No. 10--Left-over from above, tomato, creamed onions.

No. 11--Consommé, spinach water, carrots, onions, garlic, tomato,
chopped parsley.

No. 12--Left-over from above, baked beans, skimmed milk.

No. 13--Carrot water, onions, garlic, tomato, browned flour, beans,
bay leaf. This tasted like beans with tomato sauce.

No. 14--Corn chowder, peas and tomato soup, pilau, milk and water.

No. 15--Baked beans, string beans, milk and cream.

No. 16--Cream of peas soup, lentil, spinach water, tomato, a little
consommé.


FRUIT SOUPS

Served with nuts, nut wafers or popped corn, are very refreshing often,
for luncheon or supper.

And when something must be served in the evening, those not too tart,
may be served with cocoanut crisps, pastry in fancy shapes, cookies or
sponge cakes and nuts.

Fruit soups are served hot, in cups, and cold or slightly frozen, in
glasses.

Sea moss, sago or tapioca (⅓ to ½ cup sago and ¼ to ⅓ cup tapioca to
each 3 pts. of soup) make the most suitable foundations for them.

Honey instead of cane sugar may be used to sweeten.

The white of egg beaten, sweetened a trifle and flavored delicately
with rose, lemon or orange may be put on to each cup in roses with a
pastry tube or dropped on by teaspoonfuls.

Whipped cream may be used with some.

Berries, pieces of orange or slices of banana are sometimes served in
the soup.

Odds and ends of sauces can be utilized, and in the summer, all sorts
of fresh fruits.

Thin slices of Brazil nuts, crisp toasted almonds, English walnuts,
pecans or hickory nuts are suitable accompaniments.

=Strawberry and Pineapple Soup=

    ⅓-½ cup of sago
    or
    ¼-⅓ cup of tapioca
    2½ cups strawberry juice
    ¼ cup lemon juice
    1½ cup pineapple juice
    sugar, if necessary
    salt

Put sago or tapioca into the inner cup of a double boiler with 1 cup of
warm water. Soak sago 1 hr., tapioca 10 m. to 2 hrs., according to the
kind. When soaked, pour 1 cup of boiling water over, add a little salt
and cook until transparent. Add strawberry, pineapple and lemon juice,
and sugar to make delicately sweet. Heat to just below the boiling
point and serve at once, or cool.

Small pieces of pineapple make a pleasant addition.

Cherry or currant juice may be used in place of the strawberry.

If too thick, a little water or juice may be added.

Other suitable fruit juices may be substituted for the ones given:
with those of strong and positive flavor a larger proportion of water
may be used. Of course, with some tart juices, no lemon juice would be
required.

=Cherry Soup=

¼ cup tapioca, 3 cups water, 1 pt. juice from dark red canned or stewed
cherries. Flavor with oil of lemon or orange rind if desired.

May add some of the cherries just before serving.

=Sea Moss Fruit Soup=

    2 cups diluted red raspberry juice
    2 level teaspns. sea moss farine if soup is to be served cold,
        or 5 if warm
    ⅓ cup orange juice
    3 or 4 teaspns. lemon juice
    2 tablespns. sugar flavored with the oil of the orange

Stir moss into cold fruit juice, heat in double boiler 25-30 m.,
stirring often; add lemon and orange juice and sugar, stir till sugar
is dissolved. Serve warm or cold.

=Scandinavian Fruit Soup=

    ½ cup sago
    5 cups water
    1 cup cooked prunes in pieces
    ½ cup stewed raisins
    ½ cup tart fruit juice
    ½-1 cup sugar

Soak sago in 1 cup warm water, add the quart of water boiling. with
salt, and cook until sago is transparent. Add other ingredients, heat,
serve.

Dried peaches, apricots or apples may be used sometimes. Grape, currant
or cranberry are suitable juices.

=Grape Juice Cream Soup=

    1 pt. water
    1 cup Concord grape juice
    4 tablespns. raisins
    4 tablespns. currants
    2 tablespns. finely-sliced citron
    2 tablespns. sugar
    ½ cup cream

Stew raisins, currants and citron together, add other ingredients,
heat, serve.

Excellent without cream.

=Raisin and Almond Broth--small quantity=

Stew 1 tablespn. raisins cut fine, in 1 cup of water ½ to 1 hour. Add
2 teaspns. almond butter stirred smooth with 2 tablespns. of water, a
trifle of salt and a little sugar if desired or allowed.

=Blueberry and Cocoanut Soup=

Steep grated cocoanut in rich blueberry juice in a not too hot place
for 20 m. Strain. Add sugar as required and a little lemon juice if
necessary, with or without dairy cream. Serve cold with sponge cake or
cookies. Rich cocoanut milk may be used instead of grated cocoanut.

=Tomato and Raisin Soup=

1 cup seeded raisins; stew till tender. Drain and add to the liquid,
water to make 1½ cup, 1½ cup strained tomato, salt, 4 tablespns. cream
with 2 teaspns. sugar.


SOUP GARNISHES AND ACCOMPANIMENTS

=Croutons=

Of all the accompaniments to soups, croutons (crusts of bread) are
perhaps the most desirable as well as most practical. To make them, cut
slices of bread, not too fresh, into any desired shapes, dry, slowly
at first, in a warm oven, then gradually increase the heat until they
are of a delicate cream color, for such soups as bean, Swiss lentil or
bouillon; but for cream soups, dry to crispness without browning.

A favorite shape is made by cutting rather thin loaves of bread into
half inch slices, laying 3 or 4 together and cutting them diagonally
across the narrow way of the slice. This gives dainty strips,
convenient and attractive. The most common way is to cut slices
straight across each way, leaving the bread in dice.

=Miscellaneous=

Croutons, however, are not suitable for very delicate flavored soups,
such as cream of corn or cream of rice. For these, there is nothing
equal to dainty cream or nut-shortened sticks, or little soup crackers.

Cook some of the small Italian pastes (you can be sure that they are
Italian only by buying them of the Italian dealer himself), vermicelli,
soprafini, ditalini, acini di pepe, or others, in boiling salted water
until tender (from 10 to 15 m.), drain and add to suitable soups in the
proportion of one ounce to ¾-1 qt. of soup.

Add a few kernels of popped corn to each plateful of corn soup.

Roll lettuce leaves in tight rolls and cut off in slender rings;
pick up with the fingers and drop into hot soup; or cut lettuce with
vegetable cutter, round or in any not too fine shapes and scatter into
plates of soup as served.

Cut left-overs of pie crust into fancy shapes. Bake and drop into each
plate of soup in serving. They must not stand in the soup long or they
will dissolve.

=Dice Royale=

Coat ¾ in. dice of bread with beaten egg. Bake just before serving.
Serve a few in each dish of soup, or throw into tureen just before
sending to table. May roll cubes in finely-chopped onion or parsley.

=Cream Soup Balls=

    1 large tablespn. oil
    ½ cup pastry flour
    1 cup boiling water
    ⅜ teaspn. salt
    4 tablespns. finely-sliced celery, or
    ¼ teaspn. celery salt
    2 teaspns. chopped parsley
    (parsley may be omitted)

Heat oil in frying pan until hot, not brown. Add half the flour and rub
to a paste, then add boiling water gradually, stirring until smooth.
Stir in remainder of flour dry.

When the sauce is smooth and creamy and well cooked, remove from the
fire, cool a little, and stir in celery, parsley and salt. The mixture
will be very stiff.

Stand in cool place until perfectly cold, then shape into balls 1¼ to
1½ in. in diameter, or cones 1½ in. at the base, or cubes of 1¼ in.,
or sticks 3½ to 4 in. in length by ¾ of an inch in diameter. Roll in
fine zwieback or cracker crumbs, then in beaten egg (add salt and a
tablespoon of water to each egg), then in crumbs again.

Place on oiled tins a short distance apart, and set in cool place till
15 m. before serving, then put into a quick oven and bake until a
delicate brown and cracked a little. Serve immediately.

If baked too long or too slowly, they will not keep their shape.

This makes 12 to 14 balls. ½ a beaten egg may be added when the celery
is, but the balls are more creamy without it.

The balls may be made the day before required, kept in the ice box and
baked at serving time.

Variation No. 1. Use 2 tablespns. of small pieces of hickory or other
nut meats instead of the celery.

Variation No. 2. Use 2 tablespns. of black walnut meal (made by rubbing
meats through a fine colander with a potato masher), and a little onion.

Variation No. 3. Use ¼ to ⅜ teaspn. grated lemon rind, instead of other
flavorings.

Variation No. 4. Use chopped trumese, with sage and onion in place of
the celery.

The savory balls are used with the plainer soups, and vice versa; or if
both soups and balls are highly seasoned, use contrasting flavors; for
instance, the balls with lemon rind in Nut French soup.

The egg balls should be used with care as they destroy the flavor of
many soups. They, poached eggs, and hard-boiled yolks of eggs are
especially suitable for some cream soups.

=★ Soup Balls--Choux batter=

    1 cup water
    2 tablespns. butter or oil
    1 cup pastry flour
    4 eggs

Heat water and oil to boiling, stir flour in dry, stirring and beating
well with batter whip. When nearly cold, add eggs, one at a time,
mixing well, until all are in. Beat for 5 m., stand in ice box for from
1 to 12 or more hours. Drop small quantities from point of spoon into
boiling soup, or bake or boil in tiny balls, flattened.

Excellent baked, but unusually fine boiled, so delightfully free from
stickiness or doughiness.

=Egg Balls=

Rub 4 poached yolks of eggs to a paste. Beat with salt and the white
of 1 raw egg. Form into balls ¾ to 1 in. in diameter. Roll in browned
flour No. 1, bake just before serving. May beat white of egg first.

The raw yolk is sometimes used in place of the white. The balls may be
boiled for 5 m. in the soup, instead of being baked.

=★ Royal Paste=

Beat together 4 eggs, ½ cup thin cream, ½ teaspn. salt. Pour into oiled
tin, place in pan of water; bake slowly until firm. Turn from molds at
once.

When paste is to be cut into fancy shapes with vegetable cutters it
should not be over ¼ in. deep in the pans; but if for dice, it may be
any depth.

This quantity is sufficient for 6 qts. of soup.

I often tint parts of paste with vegetable or fruit colors, spinach
green, parsley, carrots or cranberries.

The left-overs from cutting may be chopped for another soup or a roast.

Use 1½ tablespn. of cream for 1 egg.

Royal may be flavored with onion juice. A little very fine chopped
parsley may be added to it before baking.

Consommé is sometimes used in place of cream.

4 yolks of eggs and 1 white may be used instead of 4 whole eggs with
the same quantity of liquid, and rich milk will do instead of cream,
but the paste will not be as tender.

=Spun Eggs=

Break eggs into cup (2 for each quart of soup). Leave whole and turn
slowly into rapidly boiling soup, beating briskly with fork or wire
batter whip, until egg is in white and yellow shreds. Boil up well and
serve soup at once. Or, beat eggs and let them stand until the froth
subsides, then add to the soup in the same way.

=Thickening for Potato Soup=

    1 tablespn. flour
    ½ cup cold water
    yolks 2 eggs

Blend flour and water, add to boiling soup, boil up well.

Turn some of the hot soup slowly on to the beaten yolks, stirring, add
them to the soup, do not boil, serve at once.

Whipped cream may be added to potato soup just before serving.

=Rice Timbales=

    ⅓ cup rice
    1 cup water
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ½ teaspn. oil or melted butter

Soak rice in water for half an hour, add salt and oil, stir well and
steam without stirring, ¾ to 1 hour. Press into small oiled molds. Set
in a pan of hot water covered, for 10 m. Put one in the center of each
plate of soup, with or without a small leaf of parsley on top. Rice may
be boiled.

=Dumplings=

Cut bread or universal dough into small rounds or make into very small
balls; let rise and steam 20 m. or boil 10 to 15 m. in rich soup just
before serving, or boil in water and add to soup.

=Noodles=

I have had equally good success with all three of the following
combinations:--

    4 eggs,
    salt,
    1¾-2 cups bread flour. (Always use bread flour.)

    3 eggs,
    2 tablespns. water,
    salt,
    1 teaspn. melted butter,
    about 2 cups flour.

    Yolks 4 eggs,
    2 tablespns. water,
    salt,
    about 1¼ cup flour.

Beat eggs a little with salt, add water if used, and flour for stiff
dough. Knead on floured board until dry but not flakey.

Then cut into three or four pieces and knead each piece, without
more flour, until very smooth. Roll each piece as thin and as large
as possible, some say to the thickness of a fifty cent piece, hang
on clothes bars, away from the fire, turning often until dry but not
brittle.

Roll up without flour and cut into fine slices from the end; or fold in
1½ in. accordion pleats and cut fine, or cut into strips of any desired
width and cut these into narrow match-like pieces; or cut into rounds
or fancy shapes with vegetable cutters. If cut in the first two ways,
shake out upon a cloth or board and dry ½ to 1 hour.

Add noodles to boiling consommé and boil rapidly, stirring occasionally
with a fork, for 10 to 20 m., or until tender.

Serve soup at once or noodles will become pasty.

Noodles may be cooked in boiling salted water, drained and added to
soup, or cooked for 5 m. in water and finished in soup, giving a
clearer consommé.

Noodles may be cooked in Mother’s and Nut French soup, as well as in
bouillon or consommé.

Noodles may be dried thoroughly and stored in jars or close-covered
box, almost indefinitely; but will require a much longer cooking.

=★ Cream Noodles=

Beat 1 egg light, add 1 tablespn. milk and a pinch of salt; then beat
in 3-4½ tablespns. flour.

Turn slowly in a slender stream into rapidly boiling soup, stirring
constantly; boil up well and serve at once.

When the mixture is poured slowly from the point of a spoon, it will be
in shreds, and when cooked will be firm enough to hold its shape, but
not hard.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Cooking is not drudgery--it is an art.... No one who stands by a hot
stove ever cooks. That party only waits. The cook is always on the _qui
vive_. In the exaltation and exhileration of his artistic services, he
forgets that the stove is hot.”

    --_Dr. Harvey W. Wiley._




ENTRÉES AND BREAKFAST, LUNCHEON AND SUPPER DISHES


“Entrées are the dishes served between any of the regular courses,” one
writer says. Another, “Entrées--a conventional term for side dishes.”
Entrées proper may or may not have a large proportion of strength
giving elements; but in this book we are placing the foods richest in
proteids under the head of “true meats.”

As many entrées make good breakfast, luncheon and supper dishes and
_vice versa_, it seemed best to group these all together.


CROQUETTES

Egg for dipping croquettes should be slightly beaten with a pinch of
salt and 1 teaspn. to 1 tablespn. of water to each egg.

The whites of eggs alone (beaten just enough to mix with the water),
also yolks alone or crumbs without egg may be used.

Crumbs may be cracker, zwieback, dry bread or granella. Corn meal,
flour, or a mixture of crumbs and flour are used for dipping. For
vegetable and cereal croquettes, the nut meals are excellent.

Mix fine chopped onion and parsley with egg or crumbs sometimes for
croquettes.

Full directions for shaping and baking are given with trumese
croquettes.

Suitable croquettes or patties may be served on beds of pilau, or on
plain boiled rice with gravy, or with macaroni in cream sauce, and some
are used as garnishes or accompaniments for true meat dishes.

=Croquette Sauce=

To be used with different additions.

    1-2 tablespns. butter
    2-2½ tablespns. flour
    1 cup hot milk
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt

1 teaspn. grated onion may be used when suitable and also 1 egg, but
croquettes are more creamy without the egg.

Rub the butter and flour together, add boiling milk, stirring; boil,
remove from fire, add whatever is to be used for croquettes, cool
thoroughly, shape into cones or rolls, set in cold place until ready to
use.

This quantity is sufficient for the equivalent of 2 cups of fine
chopped meat.

=Corn Croquettes=

    1 pt. grated corn, (or 1 can of corn well drained)
    1 pt. stale bread crumbs
    2 tablespns. flour.
    1 egg
    salt

Mix, shape, bake. These croquettes may be breaded only. They may be
used as garnish for a timbale if shaped in cones or balls, or served
with cream sauce as a separate course.

=Celery Croquettes=

    1 cup mashed potato
    ¾ cup finely-sliced celery
    1-1½ teaspn. butter
    2 tablespns. chopped nuts (not too fine)
    salt

Do not cook celery. Mix all ingredients while potato is hot. Cool,
shape, egg and crumb. Stand in cold place until ready to bake.

=Rice Croquettes--cold boiled rice=

Add 2 or 3 tablespns. milk to 2 cups cold boiled rice. Heat in double
boiler until softened; then add 1 tablespn. butter, 1 beaten egg and
salt. Cream may be used instead of milk and butter. Cool, shape, roll
in nut meal, bake. Serve as garnish for a ragout, or with stewed green
peas, cream or lentil gravy, or maple syrup or jelly.

=Rice Croquettes No. 2=

Cook 1 cup of rice in a quart of milk with a level teaspn. of salt,
in a double boiler until rice is tender and milk absorbed. Add yolks
of 4 eggs or 2 whole eggs, and 2-4 tablespns. sugar. Cool, shape,
egg, crumb, bake. Serve with strawberry or fig sauce, or with quince,
elderberry, or some not too tart jelly. May cook rice in half milk and
half water, and if desired add a little butter. Sugar may be omitted.

=Rice and Fig Croquettes=

Add 1 cup of fine cut or ground fresh figs to the preceding recipe,
with less or no sugar: 1 teaspn. of vanilla also if desired, and serve
with orange or cream sauce as dessert at luncheon.

=Bread Croquettes=

    1 tablespn. butter
    2 tablespns. flour
    1 cup milk
    1 egg
    salt
    bread crumbs

Heat, do not brown, butter, add flour and stir smooth; pour milk in
hot, when smooth, remove from fire, add salt and egg and enough bread
crumbs to shape. Cool, shape into balls or rolls, bake. Serve as a
garnish or as a separate dish with or without sauce. The mixture may be
flavored with some of the sweet herbs or minced onion.

=Oyster Plant Patties=

    1 pt. cooked pulp of oyster plant
    2 tablespns. cream, with oyster
      liquor to make a large half-cup
      (or 1 tablespn. butter with milk
      and the liquor)
    2 eggs, or about ¼ cup cracker crumbs
    salt

Mix all ingredients; sprinkle buttered shells or scallop dishes with
crumbs, put a spoonful of the mixture in each and sprinkle tops of
patties with crumbs. Bake in moderate oven on top grate 5-10 m., serve
at once.

Patties may be served as a second course at dinner, or for a luncheon
dish.

For _pulp_, grind about three bunches of oyster plant through the
medium cutter of a food chopper. Cook in a small amount of water until
just tender, adding salt about 5 m. before removing from the fire.

=Asparagus en Croustade=

Cut the top crust from gems baked in flat oblong, or round gem pans,
and remove the soft inside part. Warm in oven. Have ready one cup hot
cooked asparagus tips.

  _Sauce_--

    3 tablespns. butter
    5-6 tablespns. flour
    3 cups hot milk
    salt
    1 egg

Prepare the sauce as usual, adding beaten egg last, heat without
boiling, carefully stir in the asparagus tips, fill the crusts and
serve. A few tips may be reserved and pressed into the sauce after
crusts are filled, leaving the heads sticking up. Green peas or
stringless beans may be substituted for asparagus. Patty pan pastry
crusts may be used.

=Oyster Plant en Croustade=

Remove soft inside crumbs (they will go into a roast) from gems. Fill
with oyster plant in cream sauce, sprinkle with crumbs and chopped
parsley. Heat in oven, serve with celery plain or fringed.

May use pastry crusts.

=Vegetable Cutlets=

Grate or grind carrots; cook, salt, drain. Cut young tender string
beans into small pieces and cook in salted water. Mix with nicely
seasoned mashed potato, add grated onion, a trifle of crushed garlic if
liked, chopped parsley, and salt if necessary; shape into oblong cakes,
egg, crumb or dip into corn meal or flour. Pour a little melted butter
over them in the pan and brown in a quick oven. Serve with cream sauce,
at once.

The mixture may be enclosed in pastry crust as surprise biscuit.

=★ Squash Cutlets=

Cook young, tender Fordhook or crook-neck squash in ½ in. slices. Dip
in egg and flour or crumbs. Bake, covered at first. on well oiled
griddle or in covered pan in rather hot oven 25-35 m. or until squash
is tender. Serve as soon as done as an entrée or as a garnish.

May soak slices in ice water ½-1 hour; drain and wipe dry before
dipping.

=Cucumber Cutlets=

Slice cucumbers in thick slices across, or if small cut into halves
lengthwise. Wipe dry with a towel if soaked in ice water. Dip in egg
and crumbs or cracker dust. Bake covered in hot oven until tender,
20-30 m. Serve as luncheon dish or as garnish for a meat dish.

A little fine chopped onion may be sprinkled over before baking.

=★ Cutlets of Corn Meal Porridge, or Hasty Pudding=

Make corn meal porridge just thick enough to mold, not stiff. Cook
thoroughly and turn into bread tins or other molds which have been wet
in cold water. When cold, slice, egg and crumb, or dip in flour (No. 1,
browned, best). Brown in hot oven. Serve plain or with mushroom sauce
or maple syrup for supper, breakfast or luncheon. In small round or
square slices it may be used as a garnish for creamed vegetables or
true meat dishes.

For variety, coarse chopped nuts may be stirred into the porridge
before molding.

Porridge may be molded in small egg cups and finished the same as
slices.

=Rice Cutlets=

Put hot boiled rice (cooked in water or part milk) into square mold or
brick shaped bread tin which has been wet in cold water, cover close
and stand in cold place. Slice, dip in oil or melted butter and crumbs
and bake in quick oven. Serve with green peas, mushroom or any desired
sauce, or with jelly, honey or maple syrup.

Dip in egg and crumbs, or in French toast mixture when preferred.

=Corn Cakes=

=Mrs. George S. Hopper=

    1 can corn, chopped (or 1 pt. fresh grated)
    1 egg
    1 cup milk
    7-7½ level tablespns. cracker crumbs or enough to thicken

Bake in thick cakes on griddle on top of stove or in oven.

=Corn Cakes No. 2=

    2 cups grated corn (about 8 ears)
    3 eggs
    2 tablespns. milk.
    salt
    cracker crumbs to thicken

Bake on griddle on top of stove or set in oven on grate after being
dropped on to hot griddle, or bake in shallow gem pans.

=★ Corn Oysters=

    2-2½ cups (8 small ears) grated corn not too young
    2 beaten eggs
    salt

Drop batter in small spoonfuls on hot buttered griddle. Brown
delicately on both sides and serve at once. Fine cut celery may be
added to the batter before baking. Add a few cracker crumbs (not bread
crumbs or flour) if corn is very milky. Canned corn does not make good
oysters.

=★ Oyster Plant Griddle Cakes=

    1 cup mixed rich milk and oyster plant broth
    2 level tablespns. flour
    1½ cup oyster plant cooked in slices
    1 egg
    salt
    about ½ cup rolled cracker

Bake on hot buttered griddle on stove or top grate of oven.

=★ Corn Custards=

    ½ cup grated corn
    1-2 teaspns. sugar
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt
    2 eggs
    1 cup milk

Beat eggs and mix with other ingredients, turn into oiled custard cups,
set in pan of water in oven and bake until firm in the center. May
be served in the cups, or turned out carefully after standing a few
minutes. Serve with wafers or as accompaniment to meat dishes.

=★ Celery Custards=

    2 eggs
    1 cup milk
    ¾ cup fine cut celery
    1 tablespn. melted butter
    ½ tablespn. chopped onion
    ½ teaspn. salt

Simmer onion and celery in butter without browning. Beat eggs and mix
all ingredients. Turn into custard cups; bake in pan of water, covered,
until egg is set; after standing a few minutes, turn out of cups on to
individual dishes. Serve with ripe olives and wafers or as a garnish to
meat dish. May turn on to broiled rounds of trumese.

=★ Onion Custards=

    2 cups fine sliced onion
    a little fine sliced celery
    2 eggs
    2 tablespns. cream
    salt

Cook onions in very little water until tender; drain slightly, add
celery and other ingredients. Bake in custard cups or individual
soufflé dishes until firm in center. Unmold on to platter or chop tray
and surround with green peas in cream sauce. Onions may be rubbed
through colander after cooking.

=Celery and Mushrooms à la Crême=

    1¼ qt. celery in inch slices
    1 cup mushrooms in quarters or eighths

Cook celery and mushrooms separate and drain.

  _Sauce_--

    ¼ cup oil and melted butter
    ¼-½ cup chopped onion
    ¾ cup flour
    1 egg or yolk only
    1 teaspn. chopped parsley
    salt

Simmer onion in oil and add flour, then boiling water to leave stiff
(perhaps about 1 pt.); when smooth remove from fire, add salt, parsley
and beaten egg. Use liquid drained from celery and mushrooms with water
in the sauce. Put layers of sauce, cooked celery and mushrooms in
baking dish with sauce on top. Sprinkle with crumbs or corn meal, heat
and brown in oven. A little garlic may be used and sometimes a small
quantity of cream with a very little strained tomato in the sauce.

=Young Lima Beans à la Crême=

Cook young tender Lima beans and use in place of celery and mushrooms
in above.

=Asparagus Tips à la Crême=

Use cooked asparagus tips with the heads sticking up out of the cream a
little, instead of celery and mushrooms, in Celery and Mushrooms à la
Crême.

=Oyster Plant and Mushrooms à la Crême=

Cook sliced oyster plant (large slices cut in quarters) not too soft in
a small quantity of water. Drain and use in place of trumese in Trumese
and Mushrooms à la Crême, of Trumese Dishes, using oyster plant liquor
instead of water in the sauce.

=Macaroni and Mushrooms à la Crême=

Use one of the smaller varieties of macaroni, one that will make the
desired size when cooked, in place of trumese in Trumese and Mushrooms
à la Crême, of Trumese Dishes.

=Green Corn Pudding=

Accompaniment to roasts, timbales or other meat dishes, or a luncheon
or supper dish.

    3 cups (12 ears) grated corn
    1 tablespn. sugar if corn is not sweet
    2 tablespns. butter if desired
    1 qt. milk
    1 teaspn. salt
    4 eggs

Rub butter and sugar together, add yolks of eggs, beat a little,
add corn and salt, mix; add milk, and when smooth chop in the
stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in slow oven about 1 hour.
Cover until near the last.

=Corn Pudding--no milk=

    3 cups corn pulp
    2-3 tablespns. melted butter
    1 tablespn. sugar if necessary
    1 egg
    salt

If corn is very old a little liquid may be required, or if very milky a
few cracker crumbs. Bake in pie plates or pudding dish to a nice brown.

=Corn Pudding--no eggs=

    3 cups corn pulp
    1 pt. milk
    1 tablespn. melted butter
    1 tablespn. sugar if required
    1 teaspn. salt.

Bake one hour in moderate oven.

Canned corn may be used in winter. Add ½ cup of sugar and serve as a
dessert sometimes.

=Oyster Plant Pudding--no eggs=

    8 large roots of oyster plant (1 pt. after cooking)
    2 level tablespns. butter
    1 tablespn. cream
    1 tablespn. oyster liquor
    1 tablespn. milk
    salt

Grind scraped oyster plant through medium cutter of food chopper, cook
in as small an amount of water as possible until tender, not soft; add
salt, drain and add the other ingredients. Put into a baking dish,
sprinkle with cracker crumbs or granella and chopped parsley. Turn a
little melted butter over and brown in oven.

=Sweet Potato Pudding=

    1 large sweet potato
    1 qt. milk
    1 tablespn. butter
    4 eggs
    salt

Peel and grate raw potato. Pour hot milk over and let it boil up.
Remove from fire, add salt, butter and beaten eggs; bake in buttered
pudding dish in moderate oven 20 m. or until firm in center.

This dish (with the eggs and milk) may serve as the meat dish of a meal.

=Squash Pudding=

To each pint of mashed winter squash add 1-1½ tablespn. almond or dairy
cream (and if squash is very dry, a little milk), ¾-1 teaspn. salt, 1
teaspn. sugar and 1 beaten egg. Bake in pudding dish in moderate oven
about 20 m. May sprinkle with bread crumbs. A little minced onion may
be used in the pudding.

=★ Carrot Pudding=

    1 cup mashed carrot
    ½ cup corn
    ½ cup stewed tomato from which the juice has been drained
    1 tablespn. chopped onion
    2 eggs
    salt
    chopped parsley

Mix all ingredients, beating eggs slightly, turn into baking dish,
sprinkle with crumbs and parsley. Bake until firm in the center.

=Scalloped Asparagus=

Make a thin cream sauce of cream and the water in which the asparagus
was cooked, cover the bottom of a serving dish with sauce, put in a
layer of asparagus cooked in short pieces (the tips may have been used
for croustades) and sprinkle with cracker crumbs; continue layers,
cover top with thin or split crackers, pour sauce over, sprinkle with
chopped parsley, bake 15-20 m.

=Sister Ford’s Scalloped Cabbage--Delicious=

Chop a nice head of cabbage or shave it fine and put it into a baking
dish with alternate layers of bread or zwieback crumbs. Turn over it
enough rich milk, to which a little salt has been added, to half cover
it. Let it boil up once and then set where it will stew slowly until
the cabbage is tender, but no longer.

=Scalloped Egg Plant=

Cut egg plant into slices ½-¾ in. thick. Peel and put into a large
quantity of cold water over the fire and bring to the boiling point,
boil 5 m. and drain. Repeat the process, add salt to the third water,
boil 10 m. and drain. Put into scallop dish in layers with bread or
cracker crumbs--just a few, cover with rich milk or thin cream and bake
covered until the slices are tender, ½ hr. or longer. Uncover, brown
and serve. The egg plant may be cut into large cubes.

=Armenian Scallop of Egg Plant=

    1 large egg plant
    1½-2 cups strained or unstrained tomato
    ½ cup sliced or chopped onion
    3 or 4 cloves of garlic, fine
    chopped parsley
    salt
    2 tablespns. butter or oil
    a few bread crumbs

Prepare egg plant as in preceding recipe; mix onion, garlic, salt and
a part of the crumbs. Sprinkle mixture in bottom of baking dish, and
between and on top of layers of egg plant. Turn the tomato over all,
cover with crumbs, sprinkle with parsley, dot with butter or pour oil
over. Cover and bake 1½-2 hours. Brown on top grate of oven.

=Scalloped Onions=

Stew sliced onions until tender, drain and put in baking dish with
layers of bread crumbs; add salt and a little melted butter to each
layer, nearly cover with milk, sprinkle with crumbs and bake until well
browned. The butter may be omitted and a little cream added to the milk.

=Scalloped Raw Potatoes=

Slice potatoes very thin, put in layers into scallop dish, sprinkling
each layer lightly with flour or cracker crumbs and salt until dish is
⅔ full. Nearly cover with milk, sprinkle with crumbs, bake 1 hour or
until potatoes are tender. Cover at first and watch that milk does not
boil over. A very little chopped onion in the potatoes improves them.
When flour is used it is better to mix the milk and flour and pour over
the potatoes.

A quicker way is to cook the sliced potatoes in boiling salted water
for 10 m., before putting them into the scallop dish.

=Potatoes Scalloped--raw nut butter and onions=

Cooked sliced potatoes for 10 m. in boiling, salted water, drain, put
into baking dish in layers with fine chopped onion, and pour a liberal
amount of nut milk (made in the proportion of 4 tablespns. of raw nut
butter, with salt, to each qt. of water) over them. When the potatoes
are tender and the milk just creamy, sprinkle the top with browned
flour No. 1, pour a little oil over, and brown on top grate of oven.
Serve at once.

=Scalloped Cooked Potatoes=

Potatoes cooked in their jackets until nearly done are best for this
purpose and it is a good way to use up small and irregular shaped ones.
Slice or dice the potatoes, put into dish in layers with thin cream
sauce, chopped parsley and onion, have sauce on top, sprinkle with
crumbs, bake 20 m. Without the onion they are called Cottage Potatoes.

=Scalloped Sweet Potatoes=

Prepare and cook the same as scalloped Irish potatoes, without onion.

=Scalloped Squash=

A squash that is not as good cooked in other ways may be used for this
dish. Pare and cut into small pieces, boil or steam until just tender,
not soft. Arrange in layers in oiled baking dish with salt, a little
sugar and if used, a little butter. Pour over a very little milk or (if
no butter is used) thin cream, not more than ½-⅔ of a cup for a good
sized dish. Bake covered at first, then brown. Sprinkle with chopped
parsley before serving. A trifle of ground coriander or anise seed may
be used, but the natural flavor of the squash is best.

=Scalloped Oyster Plant=

    1 qt. cooked sliced oyster plant (1½ qt., 2 bunches, before cooking)
    ⅔ cup cracker crumbs
    1¼ cup oyster liquor
    1¼ cup milk
    2 tablespns. melted butter
    1 egg
    salt

Mix oyster plant liquor, milk, butter and salt. Put oyster plant into
a baking dish with a sprinkling of cracker crumbs between layers, pour
part of mixed liquid over. Sprinkle crumbs on top and turn the last cup
of liquid over, after beating the egg with it. Bake covered until just
bubbling, then remove cover and brown by setting on top grate of oven.

=Scallop of Oyster Plant=

Cook 1⅓ qt. sliced oyster plant in 1⅓ qt. water, adding salt before
draining. To the water drained off add ½-1 cup heavy cream. Boil and
thicken with flour to the consistency of thin cream; add salt and
pour over oyster plant which has been arranged in baking dish with a
slight sprinkling of stale bread crumbs between the layers and on top.
Be careful not to use too many crumbs. Bake a half hour or until well
heated through and nicely browned. Sprinkle with chopped parsley before
or after baking.

=Oyster Plant Scallop=

    1 pt. cooked oyster plant pulp prepared as for patties
    2 level tablespns. butter
    2 level tablespns. flour
    1 cup cream (or ½ cream and ½ oyster liquor)
    salt
    2 eggs

Rub butter and flour together; add cream hot. Boil, remove from fire,
add beaten eggs, salt and oyster pulp. Put into patty cases, other
individual dishes or baking dish, buttered. Sprinkle with crumbs and
chopped parsley, heat to bubbling and brown, in oven.

=Scalloped Tomatoes=

Place equal quantities of salted stewed tomatoes and delicately browned
croutons in dice as for soup, in layers in baking dish with a little
melted butter poured over each layer. Cover with the croutons and
sprinkle with melted butter. Bake, covered part of the time, 15-20 m.
Crumbs or thin slices of zwieback, or granella may be substituted for
dice.

=Scalloped Tomatoes--onion flavor=

Thin layers of bread or zwieback, or of cracker or bread crumbs, with
thick slices (or double layers) of peeled tomatoes, salt and onion
juice. Cover with crumbs, turn a little melted butter over, sprinkle
with chopped parsley. Bake, covered most of the time.

=Scalloped Celery and Tomato=

    1 qt. finely-sliced celery
    1½ qt. stewed tomato with a little of the juice drained off
    ¼-½ cup chopped onion
    2-3 teaspns. salt

Put half the celery, onion, tomato, and salt into a baking dish in the
order given, and repeat with the remaining half. Cover with small dice
or coarse crumbs of bread. Turn a little cream or melted butter over
the top, cover and bake 1¼-1½ hr. in moderate oven. The onion may be
omitted.

=Tomatoes Scalloped with Rice and Onion=

Put layers of boiled rice and tomato with thin sliced onion, salt and a
little butter or oil in baking dish, sprinkle with crumbs and parsley.
Bake, covered, in moderate oven, brown on top grate just before serving.

=Creamed Sweet Potatoes=

Cover sliced, cooked sweet potatoes in serving dish with cream or thin
cream sauce. Sprinkle with crumbs and parsley if desired. Heat gently
in oven until a delicate brown.

=★ Baked Creamed Tomatoes=

    1 pt. strained stewed tomatoes
    1¼ cup stale bread crumbs
    ¼-½ cup sweet cream
    salt

Let crumbs stand in tomato until well softened, rub through a colander,
add cream and salt. Bake in serving dish until delicately browned on
top and well heated through. Let stand in warm place 10-20 m. before
serving.

=Spinach Soufflé=

½ peck spinach (2 cups cooked). Cook; drain very dry and rub through a
fine colander. Add 1 teaspn. oil or melted butter, beat in the yolks of
2 eggs and fold in the whites beaten moderately stiff. Fill well oiled
mold about ¾ full. Set in pan of hot water and bake (covered until
nearly done) in moderate or slow oven until firm in the center, 45-60
m. Do not bake too rapidly or too long. When done, set the mold out of
the water, let it stand a moment to settle, and invert carefully on to
a platter or chop tray. Serve at once with quarters or sixths of lemon
or with one of the cream sauces, or with Sauce Amèricaine.

Baked tomatoes are very suitable for a garnish or accompaniment.

=Individual Daisy Soufflés= make pretty garnishes for timbales and
molds. Small custard cups, or the imported tin molds, being suitable
for them. Oil molds well with cold oil or softened (not melted) butter
and leave in a cool place.

Prepare daisies by cutting a small round piece from a slice of
hard-boiled yolk of egg and six diamond shaped pieces from the poached
white, for each, and arrange like daisies in the bottom of the mold,
the oil holding them in place.

Press the spinach mixture into the molds, taking care not to displace
the daisies, and bake the same as the large mold, only a shorter time,
30-35 m., or until puffed in the center and firm to the touch. Invert
on to rounds of toast and place as desired.

=Mashed Potato Loaf=

Add grated onion to nicely seasoned mashed potato; put into a long,
well buttered tin; brown in hot oven, turn out on to a platter and
serve cut in slices for luncheon or supper.

=Timbale of Carrot--unusually desirable=

    2 cups mashed carrot
    1 teaspn. salt
    2 teaspns. chopped parsley
    1 pint rich milk
    whites 3 eggs

Add stiffly-beaten whites of eggs to other ingredients which have been
mixed. Bake in buttered mold in pan of water, until firm in center,
about ½ hour. Let stand a moment after removing from oven, unmold on
to platter or chop tray, surround with spinach leaves or garnish with
other green and serve with sour sauce.

=Corn and Egg Timbale=

    1¼ qt. milk
    3 cups flour
    1 pt. corn, drained dry
    2 teaspns. salt
    4 chopped hard boiled eggs
    4 beaten raw eggs
    2 teaspns. chopped onion
    2 teaspns. chopped parsley

Blend flour with 1 pt. of the milk, heat remainder of milk in oiled
frying pan, stir in flour, remove from fire, add other ingredients,
bake in well oiled mold. Serve with sauce 16, 23, 28, or 31.

=Timbales of Corn--individual=

    1½ cup corn (cut from cob) put through fine chopper
    2 eggs
    salt
    1½ tablespn. melted butter
    1 pt. hot milk

Set molds in pan of hot water, cover, bake.

=Vegetable Pie=

Prepare vegetables (half or whole quantity) as for Trumese en
Casserole, of Trumese Dishes, use a little more liquid, thickened a
trifle. Cover and bake until vegetables are nearly or quite tender,
1-1¼ hours. Remove from fire, cool to just warm (if universal crust is
to be used), cover with crust, let rise, and bake; or, the crust may
be baked or steamed in a pie plate separately and laid over the baked
filling. If steamed, it will be dumplings.

A combination of equal quantities potatoes, turnips, parsnips, carrots
and onions covered with consommé, or very fresh milk, and baked, may
be used for a pie. Sometimes, when no potatoes are used, lay sliced
tomatoes on top of the vegetables.

Chopped parsley is suitable for all combinations. Garlic, if liked, is
nearly always an improvement.

Cooked instead of uncooked vegetables may be used.

Sliced hard boiled eggs give variety and add to the nutritive value of
pies.

When liquid is not thickened, sprinkle a little fine tapioca between
layers of vegetables.

=Oyster Plant Pie=

    1-1¼ qt. sliced oyster plant (2 large bunches)
    1½ qt. boiling water
    1 teaspn. salt

Cook oyster plant until nearly tender, add the salt, boil up well and
drain.

  _Sauce_--

    4 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    6-6½ tablespns. flour
    1 qt. and ¼ cup of oyster plant broth and water
    ½ cup cream
    ½ teaspn. salt

Heat oil, add flour, then liquid, and when smooth and well cooked, the
cream and salt, and a little chopped parsley if convenient.

_Crust_--Universal crust of ¾-1 cup of liquid, or one cup of rice
as for rice and trumese pie, or dish lined and covered or covered
only, with pastry crust. Pour part of the sauce into the baking dish,
sprinkle the cooked oyster plant in and pour the remainder of the sauce
over. Cover with the crust. Let rise until very light (if universal
crust). Bake ½-¾ hour.

May make small individual pies.

_Sauce without Cream_--½ cup of raw nut butter maybe rubbed smooth
and boiled up with the oyster broth and the cream omitted. With this,
1 teaspn. of celery salt may be used, or 3 level tablespns. chopped
onion and 1 level teaspn. sage. Chopped parsley with either. 7 or 8
tablespns. of cracker dust may be used for thickening the sauce instead
of flour.

=Oyster Plant Pastry Pie=

Cook oyster plant in small quantity of water, add salt when nearly
tender, boil up well and drain; thicken liquor slightly, add a little
butter and the cooked oyster plant. When cool, put into custard pie pan
lined with pastry, cover, bake. Serve hot with celery stewed in tomato
if desired.

=Mushroom and Celery Pie--Rice or pastry crust=

    1¼ qt. celery in inch lengths
    1-1½ pt. mushrooms in quarters or eighths
    chopped parsley

Cook and drain celery. Cook mushrooms 10-15 m. in salted water and
drain. Arrange cooked celery and mushrooms in baking dish with parsley
sprinkled between layers. Pour over the following sauce, cover with
rice (as for rice and trumese pie) or pastry crust, bake.

_Sauce_--5 tablespns. melted butter, 5½-6 tablespns. flour, the liquid
drained from the mushrooms and celery with water to make 1 qt., salt.
Rub the butter and flour together, pour boiling liquid over, boil up
well, add salt.

=Carrot Pie. Excellent=

    1 qt. cooked sliced carrots
    chopped parsley

  _Sauce_--

    5 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    2 tablespns. chopped onion
    5½ tablespns. flour
    1 qt. boiling water

Simmer, not brown, onion in oil, add flour and water, pour into
baking dish with carrots and parsley and cover with any desired
crust--universal, pastry, rice, mashed potato, dressing, or mashed
dried green peas. With the last, one would have a hearty meat dish.

=Potato Pie=

Use potatoes instead of carrots and more onion in preceding recipe.
Celery may be used (without simmering in oil) instead of the onion. ⅓-½
cup of raw nut butter, instead of the oil, rubbed smooth with water and
boiled with it would give a meaty flavor with the potatoes and onions.
A mashed lentil crust, when desired, adds to the nutritive value of the
pie.

=Stuffed Winter Squash=

    ½-⅔ of a medium sized, nice shaped winter squash
    3 cups dry bread crumbs
    sliced onion
    garlic if desired
    chopped parsley

  _Sauce_--

    3 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    3-3½ tablespns. flour
    3 cups rich consommé

Heat oil, add flour, then consommé, and salt if necessary. Saw squash
in two in the middle, or a little above the middle as required. Scrape
out the seeds and stringy pulp and rub with salt. Let stand while
preparing other ingredients; drain before stuffing. Mix crumbs and
flavorings, leaving out a little parsley: pour part or all of the
sauce over the crumb mixture. (The quantity of the sauce will depend
on the quality of the squash. If it is a dry one it will probably take
it all, and if it is quite a large one, more of all the stuffing will
be required). Fill the squash, sprinkle with crumbs or corn meal, and
chopped parsley. Set into covered baker or cover with waxed paper and
bake until squash is tender which will be in 2-3 hrs. according to the
squash. Give it plenty of time. Serve on chop tray and send plain onion
sauce to be served with it.

Coarse chopped nuts may be put into the dressing and the top of the
squash garnished after baking with halves of nuts. This makes a
beautiful as well as palatable dish.

=Baked Squash with Celery Stuffing=

Make a thick sauce of rich milk and browned flour No. 1. Add to it
chopped onion, minced garlic if liked, a few coarse bread crumbs and a
large quantity of fine sliced celery. Fill the squash which has been
prepared as in the preceding recipe, sprinkle with crumbs, cover with
slices of tomato from which the seeds have been removed, or with pieces
of canned tomato. Finish with chopped parsley; bake covered until time
to brown over the top.

Nuts may be used with this also, and unbrowned flour in the sauce if
preferred.

A simple dressing of bread or cracker crumbs and milk with a little
cream or butter and chopped onion is nice in squash.

With such _summer squashes_ as are of the right shape to bake, the
greater part of the inside may be scraped out, chopped and put in with
the dressing.

=Claudia’s Stuffed Egg Plant=

    ½ large egg plant
    ⅓ cup boiled rice
    4 tablespns. tomato
    4 tablespns. grated onion (or 3 of chopped)
    ⅔-1 tablespn. browned flour
    ½ cup fine cut celery
    3-5 truffles cut fine
    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    salt

1 dozen chopped ripe olives may be used instead of truffles, or 3 or 4
soaked dried mushrooms chopped, or all may be omitted.

Boil whole egg plant in unsalted water 20 m. Cut in halves lengthwise,
or if only one piece is to be baked cut a little one side of the
middle, using the larger piece for stuffing. The quantity of stuffing
given is for one piece only. Scrape out the pulp with a spoon, leaving
a wall ½-¾ in. thick. Chop pulp and mix with the other ingredients,
using only half the oil or butter. Rub a little salt over the inside
of the egg plant, press the stuffing in firmly, sprinkle with crumbs
and chopped parsley and pour oil over. Bake in quick oven about ½ hour,
covered when sufficiently browned.

=Stuffed Potatoes=

Cut slices off the sides of nicely baked potatoes (if large they may be
cut into halves, or they may be cut in two in the middle crosswise, or
a piece may be cut off from one end), scrape out the inside, leaving a
thin coating of the potato so that the skin will not be broken. Prepare
the same as mashed potato and beat very light, refill the skins, brush
with cream or sprinkle with crumbs and chopped parsley, set in shallow
tin and brown on top grate in oven. To serve, arrange on a napkin on a
platter, with sprays of parsley.

=Meringued Stuffed Potatoes=

Add 1 or more yolks of eggs to the mashed potato, fill skins and heat
as in preceding recipe, then pile the salted, stiffly-beaten whites of
eggs on the tops and brown delicately.

=Stuffed Tomatoes=

Select large firm tomatoes, cut out the stem end, remove the inside
with a teaspoon and turn upside down on a drainer for the liquid to
drain out.

Stuffed tomatoes may be served as a garnish for meat dishes or on
rounds of toast as a separate course, often the second course. When
suitable, they may be served on rounds or squares of broiled trumese.
Sometimes they are set into a rich cream sauce on a platter, or in
ramekins, and sprinkled with chopped truffles. Chopped nuts and parsley
may be substituted for truffles. When desired, a half nut meat may be
laid on top of each tomato before sending to the table.

=Fillings for Stuffed Tomatoes=

Buttered crumbs, the tomato pulp and salt: to this may be added grated
onion or onion and sage. Cracker crumbs instead of bread are sometimes
used.

Crumbs, chopped nuts or trumese or nutmese, garlic, onion and salt. Or,
ripe olives and celery salt with chopped parsley in place of onion and
garlic.

Boiled rice, onion, browned flour, melted butter, tomato pulp. Salt
tomatoes well inside and sprinkle with chopped parsley after stuffing.

Soaked dried mushrooms chopped, butter, crumbs, tomato pulp, onion,
salt.

Fresh mushrooms chopped, crumbs, cream or butter, salt.

Macaroni or spaghetti, tomato pulp, onion, butter, crumbs on top.

Left-overs of macaroni may be chopped slightly for filling, with small
rings as top finish.

Always fill tomatoes to the top and finish with crumbs or something
suitable.

Bake 10-30 m. (according to the filling, and the ripeness of the
tomatoes) on oiled pans without water.

=Fruit and Nut Tomatoes=

Mix equal parts chopped nuts, currants and fine cut citron with two
parts raisins cut fine and a little sugar. Fill hollowed and drained
tomatoes. Bake, serve plain or with cream or whipped cream. Raisins and
cocoanut with sugar, may be used, or either one alone.

=Stuffed Green Tomatoes=

Mixture of onion, garlic, salt, sage, a trifle of thyme and the chopped
pulp of tomato in bottom of hollowed out tomatoes; then each tomato
partly filled with dice of nutmese, covered with some of the mixture,
and the top finished with a slice of ripe tomato or pieces of canned
tomato. Bake covered 1½ hour or until tomatoes are tender. Serve on
crisped large crackers with Tomato Cream sauce or Chili sauce sprinkled
with chopped parsley. Use large tomatoes turned a little white.

=Peeled Tomatoes Baked=

Set whole peeled tomatoes in pudding dish, sprinkle generously with
salt, cover with buttered crumbs and bake: or, omit crumbs and when
tender, pour over them a thin cream sauce; sprinkle with parsley and
leave in oven 10-15 m.

=Rich Baked Sliced Tomatoes=

Cut tomatoes that are not too ripe into thick slices (halves if thin),
sprinkle with salt, chopped onion and garlic if liked, and pour a
little melted butter over. Bake. After laying slices of tomato on to
rounds of toast, add butter and flour to liquid in pan, then a little
cream; boil up and pour around tomatoes on toast.

Oil and nut milk or cream may be used instead of butter and dairy cream.

=Broiled or Baked Tomatoes=

Dip thick slices of not too ripe tomatoes in Mayonnaise or Improved
Mayonnaise dressing, then in fine sifted bread or cracker crumbs. Brown
in wire broiler or lay in agate pan and bake in hot oven.

=Tomato Short Cake=

Cover layers of split hot short cake crust of universal dough with
Cream of Tomato sauce and serve. Or, prepare unstrained tomatoes the
same as for sauce and serve over the crust.

=Pilau--stewed rice=

    1 cup rice
    3-5 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    1 onion
    2-4 cups tomato
    3-5 cups water
    1½-2½ teaspns. salt

Simmer sliced onion in oil (without browning), add salt, boiling water
and rice. Cook until rice is about half done, then add tomato hot, and
finish cooking slowly without stirring. If convenient, set into the
oven after the tomato is added. When the larger quantity of tomato is
used, the smaller quantity only of water will be required.

1½ cup sliced celery may be substituted for the onion.

Spanish rice calls for 2-3 cloves of garlic in addition to Pilau with
six cups of water and one only of tomato.

=Macaroni with Onion or Celery, and Tomato=

Substitute 1¼-1½ cup of macaroni for the rice in pilau. Hominy also may
be used in place of rice.

=Parsnip and Potato Stew=

Cut potatoes in quarters lengthwise, then across the center, and cut
parsnips into about the same size; cook separately or together and
drain; add both to cream sauce, heat, and serve on toast, or put small
slices of toast (zwieback) in the stew. This is a delightful dish
though simple.

=Succotash--Corn and Beans=

In the summer cook shelled Lima or other beans until tender. Add corn
which has been cut from the cob, boil 10-15 m., pour in a little heavy
cream, heat but do not boil; add more salt if necessary. Succotash is
one of the dishes which calls for cream. Just a few spoonfuls is all
that is required for a large quantity of succotash, but that little
perfects it.

Corn and beans may be cooked separately, combined and seasoned. All
sorts of corn and all sorts of beans may be combined with great
satisfaction, but the richest and most delightful of all is nice dried
corn (the yellow sweet corn is best) and dry common white beans. Raw
nut butter cooked to a cream is good with the dry bean succotash.

=Dried and Hulled Corn=

A very near relative (which some prefer) to succotash is the
combination of dried and hulled corn; 2 parts dried and 1 part hulled
corn, finished with cream the same as succotash.

=Vegetable Hashes=

My first experience with a vegetable hash was at a hotel in one of
the new towns in North Dakota where the landlady herself did the
cooking. The hash was made from the different vegetables left from a
boiled dinner chopped and heated, and was one of the happy gastronomic
surprises.

Just such a surprise is in store for the vegetarian who utilizes the
remains of the trumese boiled dinner.

One rule with few exceptions to be followed in hashes, is not to chop
the ingredients too fine; they should be distinguishable one from
another.

Always finish hashes in the oven when possible, either in frying pan or
baking dish.

Cold baked potatoes or those boiled in jackets are preferable for hash,
but steamed or plain boiled ones will do if not too soft. Rice may be
substituted for potato. Do not be skeptical in regard to these dishes;
try them.

=Acushnet Hash=

Heat chopped onion in oil or butter, add 2 parts chopped potatoes and
½-1 part coarse zwieback crumbs or granella, with salt. Pour a little
nut milk or dairy cream, and water over. Cover and heat well, then
brown in oven uncovered. A little sage may be used sometimes, or both
onion and sage may be omitted.

=Cabbage and Potato Hash=

1 or 2 parts cold boiled or steamed cabbage and 2 parts potato, with
cream, or butter and water makes a very meaty flavored combination. Do
not brown this hash. Heat slowly, covered.

Use parsnips or carrots in place of cabbage for other varieties. Cream
is used to advantage in these dishes. The recipes given are merely
suggestive of the many combinations possible.

=Hash with Poached Egg=

Nicely poached eggs, one for each serving, may be laid on to any of the
hashes spread on a platter.

=Savory Hash=

Equal quantities mashed or whole stewed lentils and rice or chopped
potato, with sage and onion, cream, or butter and water, salt.

=Toasts=

We learn from Dr. Vaughn of the Michigan University, and other eminent
authorities, that yeast bread browned on the two cut surfaces only,
is as unwholesome as when fresh baked, the slice being soggy and
indigestible on the inside. So, for all dishes where the ordinary toast
is usually used, we recommend the following:

=Zwieback=

Cut slices of light yeast bread into any desired shape or size. (Square
slices cut diagonally across are convenient and attractive). Lay in a
flat pan or wire dish drainer and put into a warm oven. Dry well, then
increase the heat of the oven gradually and bake to a cream color all
through. This process partially digests the starch and renders the
bread crisp, tender, and nutty in flavor. Keep zwieback in a paper
sack hanging near the fire and it will not loose its crispness. Eaten
dry with porridge and other soft foods it furnishes material for
mastication. It is also a suitable and delightful accompaniment to
fruits and nuts, and may be used when toast points are called for as a
garnish. A recipe for special zwieback bread will be found among the
yeast recipes. Salt rising bread makes especially tender zwieback.

When moist toast is desired, dip the crust part of the slice into the
liquid first, then drop the whole slice in, taking it out quickly with
a skimmer so that it will not be mushy, and lay it in a covered dish to
steam for a few minutes.

Always salt the water for dipping.

When cream or milk are the liquids for dipping, do not have them quite
boiling as boiling milk toughens the toast. Do not moisten toast when
the dressing is thin enough to soften it.

Prepared toast and dressing may be sent to the table separate and
served on individual dishes.

With many, acid or sub-acid fruit dressings served over moistened toast
cause acidity in the stomach.

Never use milk for moistening toast for fruit dressings, always water
or cream.

When delicate fruits are to be used, strain off the juice, bring it to
the boiling point and thicken it a very little with cornstarch. When
perfectly boiling add the fruit, heat carefully and dip over toast.

Many little left-overs of foods may be made into dainty and satisfying
dishes by being served on toast.

=Blueberry Toast=

The blueberry is one of the most suitable fruits for toasts. The
slightly sweetened stewed fruit may be thickened without straining,
as the berries do not break easily. Serve with Brazil nuts or dried
blanched almonds, or with chopped or ground nuts.

=Prune Toast=

Use sweet California prunes stewed without sugar, whole stoned with
juice, or in marmalade. Serve with halves of English walnuts on or
around slices when required.

=★ Sister Betty Saxby’s Toast=

Moisten white or graham zwieback according to directions and put in
layers in a tureen with the following dressing. Cover and let stand in
a warm place 10-15 m. before serving.

_Dressing_--To a pint of milk take about 1⅓ tablespn. graham (not
white) flour, or for skimmed milk, 1½ tablespn. flour, add salt and
cook in a double boiler 15 m. to ½ hour.

=Old-Fashioned Milk Toast=

Lay slices of zwieback in a deep dish with salt and bits of butter.
(Butter is not a necessity if the milk is rich). Pour hot milk over and
send to the table at once.

=Cream Toast=

Use hot thin cream without butter or salt in above recipe.

=Creamed Toast=

    1-2 tablespns. butter
    1½ tablespn. flour
    1 pt. milk
    salt

Heat butter, stir in flour, add milk hot, and when smooth a trifle
of salt. Dip slices of zwieback in sauce, lay in deep dish and pour
remaining sauce over. Set in a warm place for a few minutes before
serving.

=Cream of Corn Toast=

Thicken cream of corn soup a little more if necessary, or, add corn
to thin cream sauce, and serve on toast. Left-overs of all sorts of
cream soups may be utilized for toast: celery, asparagus, string bean,
oyster plant and spinach, also succotash and other stewed or creamed
vegetables.

=Lentil and Other Legume Toasts=

Use any lentil gravy or thickened lentil soup, cream of peas or peas
and tomato soup thickened, red kidney beans purée or thickened soup, on
moistened slices of zwieback.

=Toast Royal=

    1 cup drawn butter sauce
    3 eggs
    1 cup minced trumese or nutmese or ½ cup chopped nuts

Add meat to hot sauce and pour all over beaten salted eggs; cook as
scrambled eggs. Serve immediately on moistened slices of zwieback, with
baked tomatoes when convenient.

_The following toasts_ are of a different nature (though slices of
zwieback may be used instead of bread), but they are good emergency
dishes.

=French Toast=

Add ½ cup of milk with salt to 2 or 3 beaten eggs. Dip slices of stale
bread or moistened zwieback in the mixture and brown delicately on both
sides on moderately hot buttered griddle or in quick oven, or in frying
pan covered. Serve plain or with any suitable sauce.

Drain slices after dipping in egg mixture; crumb, bake, and serve with
honey, maple syrup or jelly for Breaded French Toast.

=German Toast=

Add grated or fine chopped onion to egg mixture and finish the same as
French toast.

=Spanish Cakes=

Batter--2 eggs, 2 tablespns. flour, 1 teaspn. of oil, milk for smooth
thin batter. Nut milk may be used and oil omitted.

Cut thin slices of bread into any desired shape (round with biscuit
cutter), spread each one of half the pieces with jelly, jam or
marmalade and press another on to it; dip in the batter, lay on oiled
baking pan, stand 15 m. or longer in a cold place. Bake in a quick
oven, serve with a bit of the preserve on top and half of a nut pressed
into each, or, dusted with powdered sugar.

=Mamie’s Surprise Biscuit=

Inclose small cakes of nicely seasoned mashed potato in pastry crust;
bake, serve with milk gravy, drawn butter or cream sauce, or with
celery only. This is the original recipe which leads to the following
variations:

Mix finely-sliced celery with the potato.

Use the mixture of black walnut and potato stuffing, or mashed lentils
or mashed peas for filling.

Serve peas biscuit with tomato or tomato cream sauce.

Serve lentil biscuit with cream, cream of tomato or mushroom sauce.

Lentil biscuit with fresh mushroom or Boundary Castle sauce, with or
without celery, might constitute one course at a dinner.

Make a filling of minced trumese, salt, oil, chopped parsley, onion and
mushrooms into small cakes or balls, inclose them in universal crust,
and when light, steam 25-30 m. Serve with drawn butter, flavored with
onion and parsley, or as garnish for a meat dish. Make balls quite
small for garnish.

=Yorkshire Pudding=

    ½ cup flour
    salt
    1⅓ cup milk
    2 eggs
    1 teaspn. oil

Beat eggs, add milk and pour gradually into flour mixed with salt; add
oil, beat well, turn into well oiled, or oiled and crumbed gem pans;
bake in moderate (slow at first) oven.

Serve as garnish or accompaniment to ragout, or if baked in flat cakes,
with slices of broiled or à la mode meats laid on them, and gravy
poured around. The pudding may be baked in a flat pan and cut into
any desired shape for serving. Whites and yolks of eggs may be beaten
separately. A large onion chopped may be used in the pudding.

=Rice Border=

Pack hot boiled rice into well oiled border mold and let stand in a
warm place (over kettle of hot water) for 10 m. Turn on to serving dish
carefully.

Or, parboil 1 cup of rice in salted water 5 m.; drain and cook in a
double boiler with 2½-3 cups of milk and salt, until the rice is tender
and the milk absorbed, then pack into the mold.

1 tablespn. of butter and the yolks of 2 eggs may be added to the rice
about 2 m. before it is taken from the double boiler.

=Oyster Plant and Potato Omelet--without eggs=

With nicely seasoned, not too moist, mashed potato, mix slices of
cooked oyster plant which have been simmered in cream or butter. Spread
in well oiled frying or omelet pan. When delicately browned on the
bottom, fold, omelet fashion, turn on to a hot platter, garnish. Serve
plain or with cream sauce or with thin drawn butter. Or, grind oyster
plant, cook in a small quantity of water, add cream or butter and mix
with plain potato. Finely-sliced raw celery or chopped raw onion and
parsley may be used in the potato sometimes.

=Baked Potatoes and Milk=

Wash potatoes well, scrubbing with vegetable brush. Cut out any
imperfect spots. Bake until just done. Break up, skins and all, into
nice rich milk and eat like bread and milk for supper. A favorite dish
of some of the early settlers in Michigan.

=Bread and Milk with Sweet Fruits=

Add nice ripe blueberries to bread and milk for supper, also ripe black
raspberries or baked sweet apples. They are all delicious.

=★ Apples in Oil=

Simmer finely-sliced onion in oil 5-10 m. without browning; add salt
and a little water, then apples which have been washed, quartered,
cored and sliced without paring. Sprinkle lightly with salt. Cover and
cook until apples are just tender, not broken. Serve for breakfast or
supper, or with a meat dish instead of a vegetable, for luncheon or
dinner.

The onion may be omitted. Use a little sugar when apples are very sour.

=Onion Apples=

Simmer sliced onions in oil, with salt, in baking pan. Place apples,
pared and cored, on top of the onions; sprinkle with sugar and put
¼ teaspn. in each cavity. Cover, bake; uncover and brown. Serve for
luncheon, or as garnish for meat dish.




TRUE MEATS


“And God said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, which
is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the
fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for _meat_.” Gen.
1:29.

“The food which God gave Adam in his sinless state is the best for
man’s use as he seeks to regain that sinless state.

“The intelligence displayed by many dumb animals approaches so closely
to human intelligence that it is a mystery.

“The animals see and hear and love and fear and suffer.

“They manifest sympathy and tenderness toward their companions in
suffering.

“They form attachments for man which are not broken without great
suffering to them.

“Think of the cruelty to animals that meat eating involves and its
effect on those who inflict and those who behold it. How it destroys
the tenderness with which we should regard these creatures of God!”

The high price of flesh foods, the knowledge of the waste matter in the
blood of even healthy animals which remains in their flesh after death,
and the well authenticated reports of the increasing prevalence of most
loathsome diseases among them, causes a growing desire among thinking
people to take their food at _first hand_, before it has become a part
of the body of some lower animal.

So, the great food question of the day is--“_What shall we use in the
place of meat?_”

Nuts, legumes (peas, beans, lentils and peanuts) and eggs contain as
do flesh meats, an excess of the proteid or muscle-building elements
(nuts and legumes a much larger proportion than flesh), so we may
combine these with fruits, vegetables and some of the cereals (rice,
for instance) and have a perfect proportion of food elements.

It must be borne in mind, however, that _proteid foods must be used
sparingly_, since an _excess_ of these foods causes _some of the most
serious diseases_.

The _bulk_ of our foods should be made up of fruits and vegetables and
some of the less hearty cereals and breads.


NUTS

As nuts occupy the highest round of the true meat ladder, we give a
variety of recipes for their use, following with legumes and eggs in
their order.

With nuts, as with other foods, the simplest way to use them is
the best. There are greater objections to foods than that they are
difficult of digestion, and in the case of nuts, that objection is
overcome by thorough mastication; in fact, they are an aid to the
cultivation of that important function in eating.

For those who are not able to chew their food, nuts may be ground into
butter.

Another aid to the digestion of nuts is the use with them of an
abundance of acid fruits. Fruits and nuts seem to be each the
complement of the other, the nuts as well, preventing the unpleasant
effects felt by some in the free use of fruits.

“No investigations have been found on record which demonstrate any
actual improvement in the digestibility of nuts due to salt.”--_M. E.
Jaffa, M. S., Professor of Nutrition, University of California._

Be sure that nuts are fresh. Rancid nuts are no better than rancid
butter. Shelled nuts do not keep as well as those in the shell.

=Almonds= stand at the head of the nut family. It is better to buy them
in the shell as shelled almonds are apt to have bitter ones among
them. Almonds should not be partaken of largely with the brown covering
on, but are better to be blanched.

_To Blanch Almonds_--Throw them into perfectly boiling water, let them
come to the boiling point again, drain, pour cold water over them and
slip the skins off with the thumb and finger. Drop the meats on to a
dry towel, and when they are all done, roll them in the towel for a
moment, then spread them on plates or trays to dry. They must be dried
slowly as they color easily, and the sweet almond flavor is gone when
a delicate color only, is developed. For butter they must be very dry,
really brittle.

=Brazil Nuts=--castanas--cream nuts, do not require blanching, as their
covering does not seem to be objectionable. They are rich in oil and
are most valuable nuts. Slice and dry them for grinding.

=Filberts=--hazelnuts--cobnuts--Barcelonas, also may be eaten without
blanching, though they may be heated in the oven (without browning) or
put into boiling water and much of the brown covering removed. They are
at their best unground, as they do not give an especially agreeable
flavor to cooked foods. They may be made into butter.

Brazil nuts and filberts often agree with those who cannot use English
walnuts and peanuts.

=English Walnuts=--The covering of the English walnut is irritating and
would better be removed when practicable. This is done by the hot water
method, using a knife instead of the thumb and finger. The unblanched
nuts may however, be used in moderation by nearly every one.

Butternuts and black walnuts blanch more easily than the English walnut.

When whole halves of such nuts as hickory nuts, pecans or English
walnuts are required, throw the nuts into boiling water for two or
three minutes, or steam them for three or four minutes, or wrap them in
woolen cloths wrung out of boiling water. Crack, and remove meats at
once. Do not leave nuts in water long enough to soak the meats.

=Pinenuts= come all ready blanched. When they require washing, pour
boiling water over them first, then cold water. Drain, dry in towels,
then on plates in warm oven.

=Peanuts=--ground nuts, because of their large proportion of oil, and
similarity in other respects to nuts are classed with them, though they
are truly legumes.

The Spanish peanut contains more oil than the Virginia, but the flavor
of the Virginia is finer and its large size makes it easier to prepare.
The “Jumbos” are the cheapest.

To blanch Spanish peanuts the usual way, heat for some time, without
browning, in a slow oven, stirring often. When cool rub between the
hands or in a bag to remove the skins. The best way to blow the hulls
away after they are removed is to turn the nuts from one pan to another
in the wind.

Spanish peanuts can be obtained all ready blanched from the nut food
factories.

The Virginias, not being so rich in oil must always be blanched the
same as almonds. Be sure to let them boil well before draining. I
prefer to blanch the Spanish ones that way, too, the results are so
much more satisfactory.

When peanuts are partly dried, break them apart and remove the germ,
which is disagreeable and unwholesome: then finish drying.


A FEW SUGGESTIVE COMBINATIONS

For Using Nuts in the Simplest Ways

Brazil nuts, filberts or blanched almonds with:--

Fresh apples, pears or peaches;

Dried, steamed or stewed figs, raisins, dates, prunes, apple sauce,
baked apples or baked quinces;

Celery, lettuce, cabbage, tender inside leaves of spinach, grated raw
carrot or turnip;

Breakfast cereals, parched or popped corn, well browned granella,
crackers, gems, zwieback, Boston brown and other breads;

Stewed green peas, string beans, asparagus, corn, greens, potatoes,
squash, cauliflower, all vegetables;

Pies, cakes and different desserts when used.

=Nut Butter=

A good nut butter mill is an excellent thing to have, but butter can be
made with the food cutters found nowadays in almost every home. If the
machine has a nut butter attachment, so much the better; otherwise the
nuts will need to be ground repeatedly until the desired fineness is
reached.

_For almond butter_, blanch and dry the almonds according to
directions, adjust the nut butter cutter, not too tight, put two or
three nuts into the mill at a time, and grind. When the almonds are
thoroughly dried they will work nicely if the mill is not fed too fast.

Brazil nuts and filberts need to be very dry for butter.

Pine nuts are usually dry enough as they come to us.

All nuts grind better when first dried.

_Raw peanut butter_ is a valuable adjunct to cookery. To make, grind
blanched dried nuts; pack in tins or jars and keep in a dry place.

_For steamed butter_, put raw butter without water into a double boiler
or close covered tins and steam 3-5 hours. Use without further cooking
in recipes calling for raw nut butter.

Or, grind dried boiled nuts the same as raw nuts. For immediate use,
boiled nuts may be ground without drying.

When _roasted nut butter_ is used, it should be in small quantities
only, for flavoring soups, sauces or desserts.

My experience is that the best way to roast nuts for butter is to heat
them, after they are blanched and dried, in a slow oven, stirring
often, until of a cream or delicate straw color. By this method they
are more evenly colored all through. Do not salt the butter, as salt
spoils it for use with sweet dried fruits as a confection, and many
prefer it without salt on their bread.

The objection to roasted nuts is the same as for browning any oil.
Raising the oil of the nuts to a temperature high enough to brown it,
decomposes it and develops a poisonous acid.

Hardly too much can be said of the evil effects of the free use of
roasted nut butter.

“There are many persons who find that roasted peanuts eaten in any
quantity are indigestible in the sense of bringing on pain and
distress.... Sometimes this distress seems to be due to eating peanuts
which are roasted until they are very brown.”

--_Mary Hinman Abel, Farmers’ Bulletin, No. 121, U.S. Department of
Agriculture._

=Nut Meal=

Nut meal is made the same as nut butter except that the nuts are ground
fewer times through the finest cutter of the mill, or once only through
the nut butter cutter loosely adjusted. Either cooked or raw peanuts
may be used, but a cooked peanut meal is very desirable. The nuts may
be cooked, dried and ground, or cooked without water, after grinding,
the same as steamed nut butter.

When one has no mill, meal of many kinds of nuts may be made in the
following manner:

Pound a few at a time in a small strong muslin bag; sift them through
a wire strainer and return the coarse pieces to the bag again with the
next portion. Be sure that not the smallest particle of shell is left
with the meats.

A dear friend of mine used to keep jars of different nut meals prepared
in this way on hand long before any manufactured ones were on the
market.

One writer says: “The children enjoy cracking the nuts and picking out
the meats, and it is a short task to prepare a cupful.”

Cooked nuts and some raw ones may be rubbed through the colander for
meal.

Nut meals are used for shortening pie crust, crackers and sticks; and
all except peanut, are delightful sprinkled over stewed fruits or
breakfast foods.

=Nut Butter for Bread=

Nut butters (except raw peanut) may be used on bread as they are
ground; but are usually stirred up with water to an agreeable
butter-like consistency, and salt added.

Strained tomato may be used instead of water for a change. This is
especially nice for sandwiches. With peanut butter made from boiled or
steamed nuts it has a flavor similar to cheese.

Nut butter is more attractive for the table when pressed through a
pastry tube in roses on to individual dishes. Use a cloth (not rubber)
pastry bag.

While pure nut butter, if kept in a dry place, will keep almost
indefinitely, it will sour as quickly as milk after water is added to
it.

=Nut Cream and Milk=

Add water to nut butter until of the desired consistency, for cream;
then still more, for milk.

Almond milk makes a delightful drink and can be used by many who cannot
take dairy milk. It may be heated and a trifle of salt added.

=Cocoanut Milk=

If you have not a cocoanut scraper, grate fresh cocoanut, one with milk
in it, or grind it four or five times through the finest cutter of a
mill. Pour over it an equal bulk or twice its bulk, of boiling water,
according to the richness of the milk desired or the quality of the
cocoanut. Stir and mix well and strain through cheese cloth or a wire
strainer. Add a second quantity of hot water and strain again, wringing
or pressing very dry. Throw the fibre away.

Use cocoanut milk or cream for vegetable or pudding sauces or in almost
any way that dairy milk and cream are used. Stir before using. To
break the nut in halves, take it in the left hand and strike it with a
hammer in a straight line around the center. It may be sawed in two if
the cups are desired for use.

=Cocoanut Butter=

Place milk on ice for a few hours when the butter will rise to the top
and can be skimmed off.

=Ground or Grated Cocoanut=

Is delightful on breakfast cereals, or eaten with bread in place of
butter. The brown covering of the meat should first be taken off.

=Shredded Cocoanut=

Put any left-overs of prepared cocoanut on a plate and set in the sun
or near the stove to dry. Keep in glass jars in a dry place. This
unsweetened cocoanut can be used for shortening and in many places
where sweet is not desirable.

=Milk and Rich Cream of Raw Peanuts=

May be prepared the same as cocoanut milk, except that cold or lukewarm
water is used instead of hot.

To raw nut meal (not butter) add one half more of water than you have
of meal. Mix and beat well, strain through a thin cloth, squeeze as dry
as possible. Let milk stand in a cool place and a very rich cream will
rise which may be used for shortening pie crust, crackers and sticks,
or in place of dairy cream in other ways. The skimmed milk will be
suitable for soups, stews or gravies. It may be cooked before using
if more convenient. The pulp also may be used in soups. It should be
thoroughly cooked.

=Nut Relish=

Different nut butters and meals may be combined in varying proportions.
For instance, 2 parts Brazil nuts, 1 part each pine nuts and almonds;
or 1 part each Brazil nuts, almonds, pecans, and pine nuts. Dry nuts
well and grind all together or combine after grinding. Press into
tumblers or small tins and stand in cool place. Unmold to serve. The
relish may be used in combinations suggested for whole nuts, and it is
a great improvement over cheese, with apple pie.

=Toasted Almonds=

When blanched almonds are thoroughly dried, put them into a slow oven
and let them come gradually to a delicate cream color, not brown. These
may be served in place of salted almonds.

Sweetmeats of fruits and nuts will be found among confections.


COOKED NUT DISHES

=Nut Croquettes=

1 cup chopped nuts (not too fine), hickory, pecan, pine or butternuts,
or a mixture of two with some almonds if desired; 2 cups boiled rice or
hominy, 1½ tablespn. oil or melted butter, salt, sage. Mix, shape into
rolls about 1 in. in diameter and 2½ in. in length. Egg and crumb; bake
in quick oven until just heated through and delicately browned, 8 to 10
m. Serve plain or with any desired sauce or vegetable.

=Nut Croquettes No. 2=

1 cup chopped nuts, 1 cup cooked rice, any desired seasoning or none,
salt; mix.

  _Sauce_--

    2 tablespns. oil
    ½ cup flour
    1-1¼ cup milk
    1 egg or yolk only or no egg
    salt

Heat but do not brown the oil, add half the flour, then the milk, and
when smooth, the salt and the remainder of the flour, and combine with
mixed nuts and rice. Cool, shape, egg, crumb, bake. Crumb also before
dipping in egg the same as Trumese croquettes, if necessary. Bake only
until beginning to crack. Serve at once.

=Savory Nut Croquettes=

1 cup stale, quite dry, bread crumbs, ½ cup (scant) milk or consommé,
¼-½ level teaspn. powdered leaf sage or winter savory, ½ cup black
walnut or butternut meats, salt. Mix, shape, egg, crumb, bake.

1 cup chopped mixed nuts may be used and celery salt or no flavoring.
Hickory nut meats alone, require no flavoring.

=Nut and Sweet Potato Cutlets=

    1 cup chopped nut meats
    2 cups chopped boiled sweet potato
    1 tablespn. butter
    1 egg
    salt

Mix while warm. Pack in brick-shaped tin until cold. Unmold, slice,
egg, crumb or flour. Brown in quick oven or on oiled griddle. Serve
plain or with sauce 16 or 17.

=★ Baked Pine Nuts=

After picking out the pieces of shell, pour boiling water over 2 lbs.
of pine nuts in a fine colander. Rinse in cold water and put into the
bean pot, with 2 large onions sliced fine, 1-1⅓ cup strained tomato and
2-2½ teaspns. salt. Heat quite rapidly at first; boil gently for a half
hour, then simmer slowly in the oven 10-12 hours or longer. Leave just
juicy for serving.

=Black Walnut and Potato Mound=

Mix 1 qt. nicely seasoned, well beaten mashed potato, ½-1 cup chopped
black walnut meats and 2 or 3 tablespns. grated onion. Pile in rocky
mound on baking pan or plate. Sprinkle with crumbs or not. Bake in
quick oven until delicately browned. Garnish and serve with sauce 6 or
16.

=Nut and Rice Roast or Timbale=

1-2 cups chopped nuts, one kind or mixed (no English walnuts unless
blanched), 2 cups boiled or steamed rice, 1½-3 tablespns. oil or melted
butter, salt.

Mix ingredients and put into well oiled timbale mold or individual
molds or brick shaped tin. Bake covered, in pan of water ¾-1½ hr.
according to size of mold. Uncover large mold a short time at the
last. Let stand a few minutes after removing from oven, unmold, and
serve with creamed celery or peas or with sauce 16 (cocoanut cream if
convenient) or 34.

Loaf may be flavored, and served with any suitable sauce.

=Loaf of Nuts=

    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    ⅓ cup whole peanuts cooked almost tender
    ½ cup each chopped or ground pecans, almonds and filberts
        (or butternuts, hazelnuts, and hickory nuts)
    2 cups stale bread crumbs pressed firmly into the cup
    salt
    ¾-1 cup water or 1 of milk

The quantity of liquid will depend upon the crumbs and other
conditions. Put into oiled mold or can, cover, steam 3 hours. Or,
have peanuts cooked tender, form into oval loaf, bake on tin in oven,
basting occasionally with butter and water or salted water only. Serve
with sauce 9, 10, 57, 59, or 69. Loaf may be served cold in slices, or
dipped in egg, and crumbed, and baked as cutlets.

Other nuts may be substituted for peanuts.

One-half cup black walnuts and 1½ cup cooked peanuts, chopped, make a
good combination. A delicate flavoring of sage, savory or onion is not
out of place with these.

=To Boil Peanuts=

Put blanched, shelled peanuts into boiling water and boil continuously,
for from 3-5 hrs., or until tender. (When the altitude is not great it
takes Virginias 4 or 5 hours and Spanish about 3 to cook tender).

Drain, saving the liquid for soup stock, and use when boiled peanuts
are called for.

=Nut Soup Stock=

Use the liquid, well diluted, poured off from boiled peanuts, for
soups. Large quantities may be boiled down to a jelly and kept for a
long time in a dry place. If paraffine is poured over the jelly, it
will keep still better. Use 1 tablespn. only of this jelly for each
quart of soup.

=Peanuts with Green Peas=

Boil 1 cup blanched peanuts 1-2 hrs., drain off the water and save for
soup. Put fresh water on to the peanuts, add salt and finish cooking.
Just before serving add 1 pt. of drained, canned peas. Heat well. Add
more salt if necessary, and serve. Or, 1 pt. of fresh green peas may
be cooked with the nuts at the last. Small new potatoes would be a
suitable addition also.

=★ Peanuts Baked like Beans=

    1 lb. (¾ qt.) blanched peanuts
    ¼ cup strained tomato
    ½-1 tablespn. browned flour
    1¼-1½ teaspn. salt

Mix browned flour, tomato and salt, put into bean pot with the nuts
and a large quantity of boiling water. Boil rapidly ½ hr., then bake
in a slow oven 8-14 hours. Add boiling water without stirring, when
necessary. When done the peanuts should be slightly juicy.

Small dumplings steamed separately, may be served with baked peanuts
sometimes.

=Baked Peanuts--Lemon Apples=

Pile peanuts in center of platter or chop tray. Surround with lemon
apples, garnish with grape leaves and tendrils or with foliage plant
leaves.

=Peanuts with Noodles or Vermicelli=

Cook peanuts in bouillon with bay leaf and onions. Just before serving,
add cooked noodles or vermicelli.

=Nut Chinese Stew=

Use boiled peanuts instead of nutmese and raw nut butter, and rice (not
too much) in place of potato, in Nut Irish Stew.

=Peanut Gumbo=

Simmer sliced or chopped onion in butter; add 1 pt. stewed okra; simmer
5-10 m. Add 1 pt. strained tomato, then ¾-1 qt. of baked or boiled
peanuts. Turn into a double boiler and add ½ cup boiled rice. Heat
15-20 m.

=Hot Pot of Peanuts=

Put layers of sliced onion, sliced potatoes and boiled peanuts into
baking dish with salt and a slight sprinkling of sage. Cover the top
with halved potatoes. Stir a little raw nut butter with water and pour
over all. Cover with a plate or close fitting cover and bake 2 hours.
Remove cover and brown.

=Peanut Hashes=

Cooked peanuts, chopped very little if any, may be used in place of
trumese with potatoes or rice for hash.

Bread, cracker or zwieback crumbs may be substituted for potato or rice.

=Peanut German Chowder=

    1 pt. cooked peanuts
    1 large onion
    2 tablespns. chopped parsley
    ½ medium sized bay leaf
    ⅛ level teaspn. thyme
    1 small carrot
    1 level tablespn. browned flour
    2 level tablespns. white flour
    1 pint milk
    1 pt. thin nut milk or broth
    small biscuit of universal dough
    oil or melted butter

Split biscuit and brown slowly in the oven. Slice or chop carrots and
onions and mix together; mix thyme, broken pieces of bay leaf, both
kinds of flour and salt, and pour into them gradually, stirring, the
milk and broth.

Put a little oil in the bottom of a baking dish, then layers of the
vegetables, peanuts and twice baked biscuit and pour some of the liquid
over. Repeat layers, leaving biscuit on top. Pour remaining liquid over
all. Sprinkle with what remains of the chopped parsley. Cover and bake
1½-2 hrs. in a moderate oven. Uncover and brown on top at last. Serve
in the dish in which it was baked.

With care, the chowder may be cooked in a kettle by using more oil
at the bottom, standing where the heat is not too intense, and
replenishing with water when necessary.

Serve on a platter or turn into a tureen with a cup of hot rich milk or
broth added if more liquid is desired.

The flavorings may be varied; savory and marjoram are sometimes used,
garlic for some tastes, also a little tomato. The herbs may be omitted
entirely. Crackers may take the place of biscuit. Nut milk only, may be
used.

=Peanut and Rice Croquettes=

    2 cups boiled or baked peanuts
    2 cups boiled rice
    1½ tablespn. oil
    sage, savoury or chopped onion
    salt

Chop nuts very little if at all. Mix all ingredients. Shape, egg,
crumb, bake. Serve plain or with sauce 6, 44, 57, or 75.

=Peanut Pie=

Universal crust of ¾-1 cup of liquid, 1 qt. of peanuts boiled with salt
and a little lemon juice, drained (liquid saved for soups and gravies).
Chopped onion and parsley.

  _Sauce_--

    5 tablespns. oil and melted butter or all butter
    6 tablespns. flour
    1 qt. boiling water
    salt

Mix butter and flour, pouring boiling water over, boil up, add salt,
and half of onion and parsley; pour into oiled baking dish, put peanuts
in, sprinkle remainder of onion and parsley over, cool to lukewarm, lay
crust on, let rise, bake.

A pastry, rice or mashed potato crust (without eggs) may be used: if
pastry, put a cup in the center of the pie to support the crust; with
potato crust it would be better to simmer the onion in the oil of the
sauce first.

=Peanut Pie with Turnip Crust=

Bake or boil peanuts (leaving quite dry when done) with sliced onion
and a little carrot, browned flour and a little tomato, parsley, salt
and celery salt, a trifle of thyme and garlic if desired. Thicken
slightly, turn into baking dish, cover with mashed turnip, sprinkle
with crumbs and chopped parsley, dot with butter or oil. Bake until top
is nicely browned.

Cups or pastry shells may be used in place of large dish for _Nut
Scallops_.

=★ Peanut Cheese=

½ lb. peanuts, boiled, ground; 5-5½ tablespns. Nut French soup or
consommé which has been cooked down thick; 4 eggs, 1 teaspn. salt,
a trifle of sage if desired. Mix all ingredients and put into well
oiled porcelain or glass jars (if glass, follow directions for cooking
trumese in glass), cover close and steam 1½-2 hrs.

=Pine Nut Cheese=

    ½ lb. coarse pine nut butter
    4 tablespns. thick tomato pulp, either red or yellow tomatoes
    3-4 tablespns. water
    1-1½ teaspns. salt

Steam 3-4 hrs.

=Pine Nut and Banana Cheese=

    ½ lb. coarse pine nut butter
    5 tablespns. banana pulp
    1-2 tablespns. water
    1½ level teaspn. salt

Steam 3-4 hrs.

=Fruit and Nut Relish=

1 cup fine chopped nuts--shell barks, almonds, pine nuts, cashews and
English walnuts or other combinations; 1 cup banana pulp, ¼ teaspn.
salt; mix all together, pack in mold, steam 3 hours. Serve cold in
slices, with gems, wafers, sweet fruits or cakes. Nice for travelling
lunches.

=Almond Cheese=

    ½ lb. blanched almonds
    4 tablespns. tomato pulp
    2 eggs
    ½-¾ teaspns. salt

Cook almonds 5 hours; grind through nut butter cutter, or press through
fine colander; add other ingredients, mix well, steam 1½-2 hrs.

=Almond Confection=

    ½ lb. almond butter
    ½ level teaspn. salt
    5⅓ tablespns. banana pulp
    3 tablespns. water
    ⅔ cup fine cut citron
    16 candied cherries cut fine

Bake 1-2 hours (according to size of loaves) in slow oven. Cherries and
citron may be ground through food cutter--finest knife.

⅔ cup very finely-cut raisins and ½ cup hickory nut meats, in pieces,
may be used instead of citron and cherries.

=★ Nesselrode Confection--Peanut=

    ½ lb. raw Virginia peanut butter
    5⅓ tablespns. banana pulp
    4 tablespns. water
    ½ teaspn. salt
    3 tablespns. raisins cut fine with shears
    1½ tablespn. well washed and dried currants
    1½ tablespn. fine cut citron
    2 tablespns. pieces hickory nut, black or English walnut meats

Mix. Bake 1½-2 hours in very slow, just warm, oven, on pad.


TRUMESE

Many years ago when experimenting with gluten washed from wheat,
the thought came to me that it would be a good thing if it could be
combined with nuts, as the nuts would supply the oil lacking in the
gluten. From former experiments I knew it would be a difficult problem,
but it was finally solved and has resulted in giving to the world a
valuable food product, which gives me great joy.

I give directions (the results of my own experimenting) for making this
food as perfectly as it can be made in our homes without the aid of
special machinery.

Whether it pays to make it or not depends on the value of our time
or whether we can procure similar foods all ready prepared. (Similar
manufactured foods on the market are called “protose,” “nutfoda” and
“nut cero”, according to where they are made).

A part of the process will be entirely new to many but it is not at all
difficult, and if directions are carefully followed the result will
be success and soon the making of a quantity of “trumese,” as I have
called it for convenience, will not be considered a greater task than
baking a batch of bread.

The first thing of importance in making trumese is securing a good
_fresh bread flour_ one that is called a heavy flour, not a blended or
a light flour.

A good bread flour will yield about two pounds of gluten to each seven
pounds of flour: but in trying a brand with which you are not familiar,
take ½-1 lb. more if you wish to have two pounds of gluten.

I give the recipe for two pounds of gluten, but if you are making
trumese for the first time it may be well to take half that quantity.

The following suggestions will enable you to substitute measures for
weights if you have no scales, and to calculate the recipe for trumese:

1 scant qt. of bread flour, laid lightly in the measure, equals 1 lb.

1 scant qt. of washed gluten equals 2 lbs.

1 scant pt. of blanched, dried, Virginia peanuts, before grinding,
equals ½ lb.

1 scant half pt. of Virginia butter equals ½ lb.

1 good ¾ pt. blanched, dried, Spanish peanuts, before grinding, equals
½ lb.

1 good ⅜ pt. of Spanish butter equals ½ lb.

1 large ¾ qt. of pine nuts equals 1 lb.

Spanish peanuts require 3 hours for cooking.

Virginia peanuts require 4-5 hours for cooking.

In mixing flour and water, calculate a little over 1 cup of water to
each pound of flour, or 8½-9 cups for 7 lbs.

The starch from the first one or two washings of the gluten dough
may be used wherever thickening is required; and for blanc mange, by
adding it to boiling (sweetened or unsweetened) milk until of the right
consistency to mold; or, for starching clothes. It is much better than
whole flour for any of these purposes. It may also be used in place of
the corn starch in Corn Starch Nutmese. No exact rule can be given for
that, but a trial or two will enable one to calculate the quantity, and
the nutmese is superior to that made with corn starch.

Make consommés double strength when using them for liquid in trumese.
As a rule, it is better to make trumese plain and season as desired
when preparing for the table.

If cans containing trumese do not leak, cook in a kettle of water with
something beneath the cans, otherwise use a steamer. If _glass_ jars
are used, start in _cold water_ and afterwards put into steamer, if
preferring not to leave in kettle.

Trumese from peanuts is more satisfactory in flavor as well as cheaper,
but to meet all cases I give recipes for making it of different kinds
of nuts. The general directions will apply to all.

=Trumese=

    2 lbs. gluten
    ½ lb. raw Virginia peanut butter
    ½ lb. Virginia peanuts cooked 4 hrs.
    3½ teaspns. salt
    2-2½ cups very strong cereal coffee

If not sure of a pure cereal coffee use 4 teaspns. browned flour with 2
cups of water.

Steam 6-12 hrs., or steam 5 hrs. and bake 1 hr. in a very slow oven.

The cooked peanuts are boiled and drained and the liquid saved for
soups.


TO PREPARE THE GLUTEN

When sifted flour is weighed or measured, spread about ⅓ of it on the
molding board and put the remainder in a pan. To this add cold water,
stirring, until you think the dough when kneaded with the flour on the
board will be very stiff. Stir the soft dough well, turn it on to the
board and knead in the remaining flour. If dough is too soft it will
waste in washing, and if too stiff (of which there is not much danger)
it will be more difficult to wash.

After kneading return the dough to the pan, cover with cold water (or
with several thicknesses of towel wrung out of cold water) and let it
stand ½ hr. only.

Now, set the pan in the sink with a large fine colander in the dish
drainer beside it. Let water run from the faucet to nearly fill the
pan (if the water from the faucet is very cold, have a teakettle of
hot water at your right hand to take off the chill) and work the dough
with the hands until the water is thick with starch. Pour that through
a strainer into some vessel where it can settle, to be used for any of
the purposes mentioned. Continue to wash the dough, draining the water
through the colander (so as to catch any particles of gluten) into the
sink, until no starch remains in the water. You now have the part of
the wheat which gives strength, the proteid element. Put the mass of
gluten into a bowl, cover and let stand in a cold place about an hour
(no longer,) draining occasionally.

Weigh out the 2 lbs. of gluten, run it through the food cutter with
the finest knife, add the cooked and raw nuts which have been ground
into butter and mixed together with the salt, and put all through the
machine five or six times. If desired very fine, use the nut butter
cutter the last time. Now mix with the cereal coffee, put into oiled
cans with close fitting covers and steam. Sealed glass jars may be used
if it is necessary to keep the trumese for some time, but it cannot be
taken out of them in as good shape.

_Another_ way to fill the cans is to divide the nut and gluten mixture
into equal parts, put equal parts of the liquid into as many different
cans, and run each part of the mixture through the mill again into the
separate cans, or drop it into the cans in the shreds in which it comes
from the mill. This may give a little better fibre.

_Another_ way of preparing the whole. Cut the gluten into pieces with
the shears; mix the cooked and uncooked nuts without grinding; put a
piece of gluten into the mill, then a few nuts, grinding, until all
are through. Sprinkle salt over the mass and put it through the mill
five or six times more, the last time with the nut butter cutter. This
gives a coarser grained trumese, but is an easier way.

A still easier way is to use all cooked nuts, but the trumese is a
little tasteless to eat as it comes from the can. In making it, use 4½
teaspns. of salt and 2 cups of liquid only.

=Trumese No. 2=

Larger proportion of nuts

    1 lb. gluten
    ¼ lb. raw nuts or butter
    ¾ lb. cooked nuts or butter
    3 teaspns. salt
    about 1¼ cup cereal coffee

Steam 6-12 hrs., or steam 5 hrs. and bake 1 hr. When baked 1 hr., use
about 1½ cup cereal coffee.

=Red Kidney Bean Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    ½ lb. raw nut butter
    ½ lb. (1⅓ cup) red kidney beans
    3½-4 teaspns. salt
    7 tablespns. (large half cup) cereal coffee

Cook beans until tender and dry, rub through colander, combine with
other ingredients and finish as for nut trumese.

=Pine Nut Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    1 lb. pine nuts, raw
    3 teaspns. salt
    3-4 teaspns. browned flour
    about 2½ cups water or cereal coffee and no browned flour

=Almond Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    1 lb. almonds, raw, blanched
    2½-3 teaspns. salt
    2 cups water, scant

With both Almond and Pine Nut trumese it is better to grind the gluten
and nuts together first.

=English Walnut Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    1 lb. English walnut butter
    2½ teaspns. salt
    1½-1¾ cup water

=Brazil Nut Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    1 lb. Brazil nut butter
    2½-3 teaspns. salt
    about 2 cups cereal coffee

=Cashew Nut Trumese=

    1 lb. gluten
    1 lb. cashew nuts, ground
    3 teaspns. salt
    about 2⅔ cups cereal coffee
    A little sage or savory if desired


TRUMESE DISHES

Trumese may be cut down the center, if loaf is round, laid on its flat
surface, sliced and served with celery, olives, apples, salt and oil,
oil and lemon juice; Chili, chutney, apple or gooseberry sauce or jelly.

When serving trumese to any one for the first time, prepare it in some
of the hot ways, either broiled with a nice sauce, or in cutlets or pie
perhaps, since many people would not be favorably impressed with it
cold, until their taste had been educated to it.

“Taste is a matter of education.” We naturally like what we have been
accustomed to.

=Trumese Salad Entrée. Better than Sardines=

    1 tablespn. chopped parsley
    ¾ tablespn. chopped onion
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt
    ¾-1 teaspn. celery salt
    ½ cup olive oil
    ⅓ cup lemon juice

Mix dry ingredients, add oil, then lemon juice slowly, stirring. Pour
this over 1 lb. of trumese which has been cut in suitable shapes and
laid in a flat pan. Let stand 2 hrs. or longer. Serve on lettuce leaves
or with garnish of tomato and lemon.

=Broiled Trumese=

Lay slices of trumese on a well oiled hot, not burned, griddle and
brown delicately on both sides. Or, brush lightly with oil, lay in a
shallow pan and put into a hot oven. Or, broil in a wire broiler over
coals or over or under a gas blaze. Serve with sauce 6, 12, 16, 17, 51,
54, 57, or 73 or with almost any of the meat and vegetable sauces;
with apple sauce, baked apples, lemon apples or jelly; with green peas,
string beans, creamed corn or any creamed vegetables; with cabbage or
celery in tomato or with stewed onions. It may also be served on or
around a mound of boiled rice with lentil or brown gravy, or with pilau
or mashed Irish or sweet potatoes.

=Trumese--Jelly Sauce=

Add jelly or jelly and lemon juice to melted butter in a sauce pan and
when hot dip slices of broiled trumese in the sauce, lay them on a
platter and pour sauce over.

=Trumese and Italian Sauce on Biscuit or Dumplings=

Lay steamed dumplings or split biscuit on platter, pour hot sauce over
and cover or surround with slices of broiled trumese.

=★ Trumese with Poached Egg=

Broil round slices of trumese and serve with a nicely poached egg on
each slice. Do not forget the parsley garnish. The trumese and soft
poached egg make a delightful combination. Cream sauce poured over the
slices of trumese before the eggs are put on makes a very rich dish.

=★ Trumese and Eggs=

Mix nut butter smooth with water or tomato, add chopped ripe olives.
Spread round slices of broiled trumese with the mixture, just warm in
oven and slide a nicely poached egg on to each.

=★ Trumese with Mushrooms=

Lay slices of broiled trumese on platter with crisp toast points
surrounding. Place broiled mushrooms on trumese, pour hot (not browned)
melted butter over and serve.

=★ Trumese à la Mode=

Cook together chopped onion and carrot and fine sliced celery, drain
and spread over slices of broiled trumese which have been laid on an
agate baking pan. Add a little fresh or stewed tomato, a trifle of
fresh or powdered thyme and a very little chopped fresh mint. Sprinkle
with chopped parsley. Mix salt, a little celery salt, browned flour,
butter or oil and hot water and pour over all. Bake in a slow oven,
covered part of the time. In serving, lay trumese carefully on platter,
cover with vegetables remaining in pan and pour liquid, if any, over.

Parsley and sliced carrots make an appropriate garnish, but the dish is
well garnished of itself.

A whole brick-shaped loaf, or halves of round loaves laid the flat side
down in a pan, may be used instead of slices of trumese.

Vegetables may be put under as well as over the trumese.

The following combinations may be substituted for the one given:

Chopped raw carrots and onion, thyme, bay leaf, browned flour, butter
and oil and consommé. Bake, covered most of the time, when the
raw vegetables are used. A gravy of nut butter, tomato and water,
thickened, may be used instead of the consommé.

Celery, carrots, turnips, onions, bay leaf, parsley, salt, browned and
white flour, oil or butter, water.

Onion, tomato, garlic, parsley, butter or oil, browned flour, salt,
water. This sauce may be thickened a little and the whole served on
boiled rice, the Mexican way.

=★ Trumese in Tomato=

This is one of the most satisfying preparations and is just as good
cold as warm.

Pour enough slightly salted, strained or unstrained stewed tomato
over the bottom of a granite pan to cover it well. Lay ¾ in. slices
of trumese in the tomato and heat all in a moderate oven until the
trumese has absorbed the tomato and is well dried. If too moist, the
character is not developed. The pulp in the pan is all the sauce that
is required. Ripe olives are an excellent accompaniment.

=Trumese with Onions=

Lay slices of broiled trumese in baking pan, cover with sliced onions
and sprinkle with salt mixed with browned flour. Pour a little oil,
melted butter or nut cream over. Add a little water when necessary.
Cover and bake until onions are tender. Remove cover at the last. Make
gravy of the remains in the pan after trumese is removed by adding
water and thickening. Strain into a bowl or over trumese. May serve on
boiled rice.

=Spanish Trumese=

Cover “Trumese with Onions” with stewed, or raw sliced, tomatoes about
½ hour before it is done and make gravy the same.

=Trumese Smothered with Bananas=

Cover slices of broiled trumese with sliced bananas, sprinkle lightly
with salt, pour a little lemon juice over and bake until bananas are
soft. Serve hot or cold.

=Trumese Baked with Onion Dressing=

Place layers of broiled trumese in a pan with a little water, cover
with a dressing made in the proportion of 2 cups bread crumbs, 2
chopped onions, 1 level tablespn. butter or oil and 2 beaten eggs.
Bake, covered, ½ hour, uncover and brown on top grate. Make gravy in
pan by adding consommé and thickening, after the trumese and dressing
are removed. Or, lay slices of stale bread over trumese, cover with
sliced onions and a little oil, sprinkle with salt and bake 1 hour
covered.

=★ Trumese Cutlets=

Dip slices of trumese in egg beaten with salt and water, 1 teaspn. of
water to each egg. Roll in fine zwieback, cracker or bread crumbs.
Brown in hot oven. Serve at once, plain or with any desired sauce.

The yolk or white of egg only with salt and a teaspoon of water may be
used. Sometimes, substitute lemon juice for water with the yolk.

Again, stir 2 level tablespns. raw nut butter with 1¾-2 tablespns.
of water and add to 1 egg with salt and chopped onion or any desired
flavoring.

1-1½ tablespn. cream to an egg makes a rich dipping mixture.

=Lemon Rings--Parsley Butter=

Cream butter, add finely-chopped parsley and place paste in pyramids in
the center of thick slices of lemon; serve with plain cutlets. Paste
to be spread on hot cutlet and lemon squeezed over by each individual.
Many enjoy a mince of green onions and garlic in the parsley butter.

=Imperial Cutlets=

Dip trumese in batter of 1 egg, 1 level tablespn. thick tomato pulp, a
little grated onion, browned flour and salt; then in crumbs. Bake and
serve with string beans or greens.

=Savory Cutlets--Mashed Potato=

Use salt, a trifle of sage and 1 tablespn. grated or chopped onion
(no water) with the egg. Crumb; bake, and serve on or around mound of
mashed potato with drawn butter.

=★ Batter Cutlets=

  _Batter_--

    2 tablespns. oil
    3-4 tablespns. flour
    1½ cup boiling water
    2 eggs
    stale bread crumbs
    salt

Heat but do not brown oil in sauce pan, stir in flour, add water,
stirring smooth. Remove from fire, add eggs and salt and a few bread
crumbs.

Broil slices of trumese on one side, turn and drop a small spoonful
of the batter on each. When broiled on the other side, turn again,
leaving the batter next to the griddle and drop another spoonful on the
trumese, turning again when the first batter is delicately browned.
Serve (without sauce) as soon as second side is browned.

Or, drop spoonfuls of batter on a hot, well oiled baking pan, lay
slices of broiled trumese on each and spread another spoonful of batter
on top of each slice; bake in a quick oven.

=★ Green Corn Cutlets=

  _Batter_--

    2 tablespns. oil or butter
    3 tablespns. flour
    ⅞ cup boiling water
    ½-¾ cup grated or ground green corn
    1 teaspn. sugar if corn is old
    3 tablespns. dry or toasted bread crumbs
    1 egg

Cook batter and use with trumese the same as batter cutlets.

=Batter No. 2=

1 pt. grated corn (if canned, grind through food cutter), 2 eggs, with
dry or toasted bread crumbs to make a batter thick enough to bake well,
salt. If corn is dry, add a little milk or cream; if very moist, add
oil or butter only.

Use with trumese the same as batter cutlets.

=Ragout (Stew) of Trumese=

Thicken bouillon or consommé to the consistency of thin cream. Add
trumese cut into dice and simmer for 20 m. or longer. Serve plain in
tureen, or on toast, or in rice or mashed potato border.

When noodles, or macaroni in any form are to be added to the stew,
simmer a bay leaf and more onion in the bouillon before thickening;
garlic also if liked.

One day we added some water drained from spinach to consommé, thickened
it and added a little cream, the trumese and some nutmese, and we had a
choice combination.

=Ragout of Trumese No. 2=

Trumese; onion, garlic, browned flour, tomato, bay leaf; juniper
berries crushed, one teaspoon to a quart of stew.

=Stewed Hashed Trumese=

Simmer hashed trumese in bouillon or consommé until just moist. Serve
on toast, thin crackers or rice: or put trumese into cream sauce and
serve on toast with or without a poached egg on each slice of toast.

=Trumese for Luncheon or Second Course=

    1 pt. trumese in dice
    2 level tablespns. butter
    2 level tablespns. flour
    ½ cup milk
    salt
    ½ cup cream
    2 hard boiled eggs
    1 tablespn. orange juice flavored with rind of orange
    ½-1 teaspn. vanilla

Rub butter and flour together over the fire, add milk and salt. Rub the
yolks of the eggs to a paste with the cream and stir into the sauce,
then add trumese and sliced whites of eggs. Heat to just boiling,
remove from fire, stir in quickly the flavored orange juice and vanilla
and serve at once. ½ cup mushrooms may be added with the trumese. In
that case, the mushroom liquor may form a part of the liquid instead of
the whole half cup of milk.

=Trumese with Truffles and Mushrooms=

    2 tablespns. butter
    3 tablespns. flour
    1 pt. hot milk
    1 teaspn. grated onion
    2 truffles
    2 mushrooms
    yolks of 2 eggs
    rings of green onion tops or shreds of lettuce
    ⅛-¼ teaspn. celery salt
    salt

Melt butter in saucepan, add flour and milk, stirring until smooth. Add
the onion and yolks of eggs, then truffles and mushrooms which have
been cut into small pieces and simmered (without browning) in butter,
then the onion tops or shreds of lettuce and the celery salt. Let all
come nearly to the boiling point and serve over broiled trumese without
delay.

=★ Trumese and Mushrooms à la Crême=

    1 lb. trumese
    1 can (1 cup) mushrooms
    zwieback, cracker crumbs or granella
    3-4 tablespns. oil
    2 tablespns. chopped onion
    4-5 tablespns. flour
    ¾ cup water
    ½ cup cream
    ¾ teaspn. salt

Simmer onion (without browning) in oil, add flour, water, cream and
salt. When smooth, remove at once from fire and mix in lightly the
mushrooms in halves or quarters and the trumese in small dice. Put into
scallop dish, or pile in the center of shells. Sprinkle lightly with
crumbs or granella and bake in a quick oven until a delicate brown
and just heated through. When shells are used they should be set in a
dripping pan and baked on top grate of oven. They must not bake too
long. If the shells are the large silver ones, they can be prettily
garnished. Serve on small plates, with delicate unfermented bread and
celery if desired. Small patty pan shells of pie paste may be used.

When this dish was served at a diplomatic dinner in Washington, one of
the guests pronounced it “sweetbreads” and could not be convinced to
the contrary.

=Trumese and Celery à la Crême=--Substitute 1¼ cup (1¼ pt. before
cooking) stewed celery for the mushrooms; or for

=Trumese and Macaroni à la Crême=--Use 1 cup small macaroni which has
been cooked with a little garlic in the water; or for

=Trumese and Oyster Plant à la Crême=--Take 1¼ cup cooked oyster plant,
and use the liquor in which it was cooked in place of water for the
sauce.

=Trumese en Casserole=

    1 qt. onions, sliced or quartered
    1 pt. turnip diced
    1 pt. carrots, quartered and sliced
    ¾-1 pt. celery, sliced
    3 tablespns. raw nut butter or meal
    ¼ cup tomatoes
    1¾ cup water
    1-2 teaspns. browned flour
    2½-3 teaspns. salt
    1 bay leaf in small pieces
    slices of broiled trumese

Put vegetables in pudding dish in order given, with a piece of bay leaf
occasionally. Mix butter, browned flour, salt, tomatoes and hot water
and pour over them. Lay slices of broiled trumese over all; cover and
bake in a rather hot oven 1-1¼ hour. Sprinkle with chopped parsley.
Set dish on large plate or tray, pin folded napkin around and send to
table. If preferred, thicken liquor slightly before pouring it over the
vegetables, and bake 15 m. longer.

=★ ★ Trumese Pie=

Sprinkle fine chopped onion and parsley in baking dish and lay in
slices of trumese (part nutmese if desired). Repeat the same until
about 1 lb. of trumese has been used. Sprinkle last with onion and
parsley.

_Sauce_--Rub together 5 tablespns. oil or melted butter and 5 or 6
tablespns. of flour. Add 1 qt. of boiling water, boil up, add salt and
pour over trumese. When cool enough, cover with biscuit of universal
crust. Cover and let stand in a warm place until crust is very light,
then bake in a moderate oven about ¾ of an hour. Cover with paper or
asbestos sheet if the crust becomes brown before baking is finished. It
is well to have some extra sauce to serve with the pie. This dish is a
general favorite. Finely-sliced celery or 1 teaspn. of celery salt or ¾
teaspn. of sage may be substituted for the onion.

=★ Rice and Trumese Pie=

Boil 1 cup of rice in salted water. When done add ½ cup of milk; spread
over above pie instead of universal crust and bake at once, covered
most of the time. Use the 6 tablespns. of flour in making sauce for
rice crust.

Nicely seasoned, not too moist _mashed potato_, without egg, may be
used for crust. A little chopped parsley mixed with the potato makes it
more attractive.

_A pastry crust_ not quite so rich as for fruit pies is nice also; put
a small cup or mold in the center of the dish to hold it up.

Savory Sauce or Vegetable Gravy may be poured over chopped or sliced
trumese, and a nicely seasoned stuffing used for the crust, for a
different pie. Slices of hard boiled eggs may be combined with trumese.

=All Ready Crusts=

When keeping house I nearly always have on hand crusts, either raised
or pastry, baked on tins about the size of my pudding dish, so that I
can lay them over the top of pie fillings or a nicely seasoned stew and
just heat them through in the oven. Small pastry crusts, the size of
individual dishes, are very convenient sometimes.

=Trumese Shortcake--Italian Sauce=

Add trumese in small dice to hot Italian sauce; heat to boiling and
pour over split hot shortcake crust, in two layers.

Serve shortcake on chop tray or platter, suitably garnished.

Cream of mushroom or Boundary Castle sauce may be used the same.

=Trumese Scallop with Cracker Crumbs=

Sprinkle cracker crumbs in bottom of dish with chopped onion and the
least bit of powdered sage. Pour a little sauce No. 41 over and cover
with a thin layer of minced trumese. Continue these layers, pour a
larger quantity of sauce over the last layer of trumese, then sprinkle
with crumbs, dot with butter and bake till well heated through and
delicately browned over the top.

Onion and sage may be omitted. Zwieback crumbs may be used instead
of cracker, and sauce No. 8 or 46 in place of 41 for other scalloped
dishes.

=Trumese Pot Pie=

Well oil the inside of a kettle. Place in it the filling and crust for
trumese pie, making the sauce with 1 or 2 tablespns. less of flour.
When crust is light, set the kettle covered tight, over a moderate
fire, and when it comes to the boiling point let it just simmer for
30-35 m. without removing the cover. It may be necessary to very
carefully place an asbestos pad under the kettle during the latter
part of the cooking. Serve with dumplings around edge of platter, and
trumese with gravy in center.

The dumplings may be steamed on a pie pan (perforated if convenient)
and laid over the filling which has been baked in a pudding dish as for
trumese pie.

A nicely seasoned trumese stew may be served with a border of small
steamed dumplings, and other varieties of pot pie may be made according
to taste and convenience.

=★ Trumese Boiled Dinner--New England Style=

Raw nut butter, a little browned flour and tomato, salt, carrots in
1-2 in. lengths, according to thickness, turnips in sections or thick
slices, cabbage in quarters or eighths according to size, 1 beet (white
if possible), pared and cut into four pieces, onions, whole, cut at
right angles ⅓ of the way up from the root end, potatoes pared and
cut into equal sizes, winter squash in large pieces, pared, slices of
broiled trumese, parsley.

Oil the bottom of the kettle. Mix in it the nut butter, browned flour,
salt and tomato, adding as much boiling water as necessary to cook the
dinner. When the liquid is boiling put in the cabbage, carrots, turnips
and beet. In about an hour, add the onions; then in ¾ of an hour the
potatoes, with the squash laid inside down over the whole. When all are
done, if you have a very large platter, lay pieces of squash around
the edge with cabbage overlapping and the other vegetables in the
center, with slices of broiled trumese around and sprays of parsley for
garnish. The liquid remaining in the kettle, with a little water added
if necessary, may be strained and served as gravy for the vegetables.
The more nearly dry the vegetables can cook without scorching the
better, _but do not let them scorch_. The squash need not be used, but
it would not be a boiled dinner to a New Englander without it.

Steamed dumplings may be served with the dinner.

=Timbales of Rice--Trumese Stuffing=

Line a well oiled mold ½-1 inch deep (according to size of mold) with
hot cooked rice. Fill nearly to top with mixture of Elsa’s roll, spread
rice over top. Cover with oiled lid and steam ½-¾ of an hour. Serve
with sauce 8, 12, 36 or 48, or any desired sauce.

Hot hominy grits (which have been cooked 2-3 hrs. in double boiler in
proportion of 1 cup of grits to 3 of water) may be used in place of
rice; also cold boiled macaroni chopped fine, with 1 egg added to each
pint of macaroni.

=★ Trumese Timbale--Boundary Castle Sauce=

    1¾ cup stale (or 1 good cup dry) bread crumbs
    1 cup hot water
    ½ lb. trumese
    ¼ cup raw nut butter
    ¼ teaspn. powdered bay leaf
    ½ teaspn. powdered sage
    ½-¾ teaspn. salt
    2 eggs

The nut butter may be omitted and 2 cups of stale (1¼ dry) crumbs used.
Use the crust as well as the center of the loaf of bread. Soak crumbs
in the water until soft, then stir over the fire until smooth and dry
enough to leave the sides of the pan. Remove from the fire, add trumese
chopped fine, bay leaf, sage, salt, nut butter and yolks of eggs. Beat
until well mixed and if convenient rub through a fine colander, then
add the whites of the eggs beaten a little. Press into a well oiled
mold, which may have been garnished with truffles, and steam 1½ hour.
Let stand a moment after taking from the steamer, then invert upon the
center of the platter. Serve with Boundary Castle sauce, which is the
crowning feature of the dish.

The timbales may be made in a round mold, or in individual molds and
served on a chop tray. Omit herbs if preferred. If truffles are used
for garnishing, the cuttings may be chopped and added to the loaf.

=★ Trumese and Rice Timbale, Roast or Loaf=

This is one of the simplest and most convenient preparations, and is as
delicious as it is convenient.

    2 cups minced trumese
    2 cups boiled or steamed rice
    ⅛-¼ cup of oil or melted butter
    salt

Mix the ingredients thoroughly and put into a timbale mold or brick
shaped bread tin, a covered can, or individual molds; steam, or bake in
pan of water (covered until the last) ¾-1½ hour according to size of
loaf. Serve with creamed celery, peas, some of the mushroom sauces, a
plain cream or any desired sauce.

=Rice Timbale--Trumese and Asparagus Tips=

Partly fill buttered timbale mold, round or oblong, with hot, nicely
cooked rice. Unmold on to tray or platter, surround with slices of
broiled trumese standing against the sides of the mold. Pour a little
drawn butter around on the dish, and lay clusters of cooked asparagus
tips around the edge. Serve with plenty of the sauce. Sauce may be
flavored with onion and parsley.

=Elsa’s Roll of Trumese=

    3 pts. minced trumese
    2 eggs
    1 cup cracker dust or granella
    ½ cup milk
    salt

Shape into a large roll; bake ½ hour, basting occasionally with oil or
butter, and water. Serve with any desired sauce or accompaniment.

=Cannelon of Trumese=

    1 pt. minced trumese (or part nutmese)
    1⅓ tablespn. butter or oil
    1-3 teaspns. chopped onion
    1 teaspn. chopped parsley
    salt

Form into roll, cover with pastry crust, fastening well at the ends,
and bake in moderate oven 20-30 m. Serve with 16, 34 or any desired
sauce. Shelled whole hard boiled eggs may be put into the center of the
roll for a novelty, when desired.

=Trumese Rissoles, Pasties or Turnovers=

Cut pastry crust into circles the size of a large saucer or small
plate. Lay a spoonful of the filling of Cannelon of Trumese on one side
of each; fold the other side over (after moistening edges) like a
turnover. Bake. Nice for travelling lunches.

=★ Trumese Soufflé=

    1 pt. chopped or ground trumese
    1 cup milk
    2 tablespns. flour
    1 tablespn. butter
    4 eggs
    1 teaspn. salt

Stir flour smooth with part of the milk, heat the remainder to boiling,
add flour and cook until thickened. Remove from fire and add butter,
trumese, salt and beaten yolks of eggs; then chop in the stiffly-beaten
whites. Put into baking dish, custard cups or molds. Set into pan of
hot water and bake (covered part of the time with oiled paper) in slow
oven 20-30 m., or until firm in the center. ¼ nutmese may be used.

=★ Trumese Croquettes=

    ½ lb. trumese
    ½ teaspn. celery salt, or
    1½ tablespn. fine cut celery
    1 tablespn. grated onion
    ½ teaspn. powdered sage
    2 teaspns. chopped parsley

Chop trumese fine, mix with other ingredients, stand in cool place
until sauce is made.

  _Sauce_--

    2 tablespns. oil
    ⅓ cup browned flour No. 1
    ½ cup white flour
    2 tablespns. grated onion
    1 teaspn. browned flour No. 3
    ¼ cup strained tomato
    1 teaspn. salt

Mix onion, browned flour No. 3, salt and tomato in pint measure, fill
the measure with boiling water. Heat the oil, rub half the flour into
it, add the boiling liquid, and when smooth, add the remainder of the
flour, stirring well; cook thoroughly over a slow fire. Remove from
fire, chop in lightly the trumese mixture and cool. When cold, shape
into rolls about three inches long and 1 inch in diameter, roll in fine
toasted bread or cracker crumbs, dip in beaten egg and roll again in
crumbs. Bake in quick oven 10 m., or until croquettes begin to crack a
little and are a delicate brown. If baked too long, or if they stand
long after baking they will lose their shape. Serve plain, or with
mushroom sauce, or jelly, or jellied cranberries, or with peas creamed,
or seasoned with butter and salt only. Well made croquettes require
no sauce. I sometimes plan to have creamed potatoes with trumese
croquettes.

This quantity will make twelve croquettes. They may be shaped into
cones if preferred.

In making more than once the recipe, use a little extra flour, as
the evaporation is less in proportion. One secret of success with
croquettes is to have the mixture as soft as possible to shape. In
shaping, drop the soft mixture on to the crumbs by spoonfuls, lift
carefully from beneath (so as not to get any of the crumbs inside
the croquettes), and shape deftly with the fingers; then roll in the
crumbs, taking care that the ends are well covered. Drop from one hand
to the other to remove the loose crumbs and lay croquettes on a plate
or board until all are crumbed the first time. (With some mixtures, the
fingers may be dipped in oil and the croquettes shaped neatly before
putting into the crumbs). For dipping, have eggs beaten slightly with
salt and water, 1 teaspn. of water to each egg. Dip the croquettes into
the mixture with the left hand only, see that the ends are moistened
with the egg, drop on to a flat dish of crumbs, with the right hand
roll them until they are well covered, and lay on to the pans in which
they are to be baked.

All ready croquettes may be kept in a cold place for a day or two
before baking when necessary.

=★ Trumese Croquettes No. 2=

Chop or grind trumese to make ¾-1 qt. Add 1½-2 teaspns. salt, 2
tablespns. each chopped parsley and grated onion. Fine cut celery may
be used instead of onion.

_Sauce_--Rub to a smooth paste 5½ tablespns. of flour and 2-3 of butter
or oil. Pour 1 pt. of boiling milk over slowly, stirring. Boil well,
add trumese, mix, cool. When cold, form into croquettes, dip in egg,
roll in crumbs, bake.

=★ Brother Barnett’s Savory Trumese and Rice Croquettes=

Use recipe for Trumese and Rice Timbale, p. 170. Flavor with sage or
winter savory, shape into croquettes, bake. Serve with sauce 4, 9,
12, 44 or 54. You will be surprised to see how nice these are. Cooked
hominy grits or chopped boiled macaroni may be used in place of rice.

=Russian Croquettes=

Cover small rolls of Elsa’s roll, p. 171, or of filling for cannelon
of trumese, p. 171, with pastry crust. Bake. Serve with eighths of red
apples, sections of orange or with baked bananas, or with any suitable
sauce or vegetable.

=★ Trumese and Potato Hash=

Put trumese and double the quantity of cold potatoes (those cooked in
their jackets until nearly tender being ideal) through food cutter,
using next to the coarsest cutter. (If chopping by hand, be sure not to
chop too fine, especially the potatoes.) Mix carefully. Simmer _without
browning_, chopped onion in oil. Add the mixed trumese and potato, pour
consommé or nicely seasoned gravy over and set in the oven to heat, and
brown over the top. If obliged to finish on top of the stove, set back,
on an asbestos pad, and heat slowly, covered.

The onion may be mixed with the trumese and potato, all put into a
baking dish, nut butter stirred to a cream with consommé poured over
and the hash baked for ¾-1 hour. Finely-sliced celery, celery salt, or
any of the sweet herbs, powdered, may be substituted for the onion.
Sage may be used occasionally with the onion.

=Trumese and Rice Hash=

Use boiled or steamed rice in place of potato in the preceding recipe.


NUTMESE

    ½ lb. Virginia peanuts, raw
    1 lb. Virginia peanuts, cooked
    2 teaspns. salt
    ⅔ cup water

Grind both cooked and raw nuts into butter, add salt and water, mix
well, put into oiled tins. Steam 5 hrs. or bake 1 hr. in slow oven on
asbestos pad. May cook in sealed glass jars, following directions p.
156, for trumese in glass jars.

Use a trifle less water for Spanish peanuts.

Cereal coffee or consommé may be used in place of water.

All ready prepared foods similar to nutmese are variously named
“nuttolene”, “nutmete”, “nutcysa” and “nut loaf,” according to where
they are made.

=Tomato Nutmese=

    ¼ lb. Virginia peanuts, raw
    1 lb. Virginia peanuts, cooked
    2 teaspns. salt
    5-5⅓ tablespns. thick tomato pulp (strained tomato cooked down)

Cook same as nutmese, having oven _very_ slow in baking.

=Cornstarch Nutmese=

The following recipe makes a very palatable preparation for those who
can use the starch; but meat substitutes should be made without starch.

    3 cups raw Spanish nut meal, or coarse butter
    1 cup cornstarch
    3-3½ teaspns. salt
    1 cup cold water
    3 cups boiling water

Stir dry ingredients with the cold water, then add the boiling water
gradually, stirring. Cook the same as nutmese. Use a little more water
with Virginia nuts. See suggestion p. 155, for using starch washed out
of gluten dough, in place of corn starch.


NUTMESE DISHES

Nutmese of nuts only, is suitable to serve with breads of all kinds
instead of butter. It takes the place of cheese nicely with apple pie
and may be served sliced, with Chili, apple, grape and different fruit
sauces or with jelly.

=Nutmese Cottage Cheese=

Take the broken pieces of nutmese left from slicing, press them through
a wire strainer, add salt and enough lemon juice to give the slight
tartness of cottage cheese. Use plenty of salt and not too much lemon
juice. Mix well and press through the strainer again. Shape into balls
and roll in chopped parsley.

Carefully =Broiled Nutmese= may be served with creamed parsnips or
celery on toast, or with mint sauce, tomato and tomato cream sauce, and
nearly all the sauces and vegetables with which trumese is served. It
is especially nice with green peas.

=Tomato Nutmese and Eggs=

Lay ¼ inch slices of broiled tomato nutmese on thin pieces of toast
of the same shape and place a soft poached egg on each. Garnish with
parsley.

Use soft scrambled eggs instead of poached sometimes.

=Nutmese and Rice with Peas Sauce=

Add chopped parsley and cooked green peas to tomato cream sauce which
has been flavored with onion, and pour sauce over a low, rocky mound of
rice surrounded by broiled nutmese.

=Nutmese with Baked Beans=

Score nutmese of the desired shape, on one side. Broil the scored side
carefully and set in the oven to just warm through. Place in center of
platter, pile baked beans around and garnish with parsley and lemon.
Nutmese made in an oblong, square-cornered tin would be very suitable
in shape.

String beans which have been cooked whole with raw nut butter in the
water may be used in place of baked beans, and French dressing or Sauce
Amèricaine poured over.

=★ Nutmese Cutlets= are made the same as trumese cutlets, p. 162,
except that nutmese cutlets are better with granella than with bread
crumbs.

=★ Nut Irish Stew--a universal favorite=

In 2 qts. of salted water to which have been added 4 or 5 tablespns. of
raw nut butter, cook from 4-6 large onions sliced thin, and 3 pts. to
2 qts. of potato cut into irregular pieces about an inch in diameter.

When the potatoes have cooked enough to give a little consistency to
the stew, drop in pieces of nutmese in strips about 1½ in. long and ¾
in. thick. Heat without stirring. Serve.

=Nutmese in Cream of Tomato Sauce=

makes a delightful stew. It may be served alone, on toast, in rice
border, or in mashed bean border. Cut nutmese into dice and add to
sauce just long enough before serving to heat through. Do not stir.

Add nutmese to Cream of Spinach soup when you have some left over and
you have an enjoyable meat dish with very little trouble.

=Nutmese and Green Peas with New Potatoes=

Serve in cream or drawn butter sauce. Old potatoes cut in small pieces
may be used.

=Nutmese à la Crême=

    ¾ lb. nutmese
    3 hard boiled eggs

Break nutmese into irregular pieces with a fork and mix it with the
eggs, chopped coarse and ¾ teaspn. salt.

  _Sauce_--

    ¼ cup oil or melted butter
    ¼-½ cup chopped onion
    ¾ cup flour
    water to leave stiff, about 1 pt.
    1 egg, or the yolk only
    1 teaspn. chopped parsley
    salt

Add onion to hot oil and simmer slowly without browning, for 10 m.
Add flour, rub smooth, pour on hot water, stir until smooth and well
cooked. Remove from fire, add parsley, salt and beaten egg. Put sauce,
and nutmese with eggs, into pudding dish, in layers, with sauce on
top. Sprinkle with crumbs, corn meal or browned flour No. 1. Bake in
moderate oven until bubbling all through and delicately browned on top.

We sometimes use a little garlic, and sometimes a little cream with
a very little strained tomato in the sauce. Another is made with the
following sauce and finished the same as the preceding:

_Sauce No. 2_--Rub ⅞ cup pastry flour smooth with water; pour it
gradually into 1 pt. of boiling milk, stirring until smooth. Pour this
over 2 beaten eggs or yolks only. Add 1 teaspn. each chopped onion and
parsley, and ¾-1 teaspn. salt.

The sauce must be very stiff or the character of the dish is spoiled.

A tablespn. of butter may be added when the sauce is taken from the
fire, if desired richer.

=Nutmese and Oyster Plant in Shells=

Use nutmese and oyster plant in place of trumese and mushrooms, in
Trumese and Mushrooms à la Crême, and the liquor in which the oyster
plant was cooked instead of water in the sauce.

=Scallop of Nutmese and Tomato=

Layers of crumbs, thin slices of nutmese and tomato sauce or tomato
cream sauce, or slices of tomato and a thick cream sauce; have sauce on
top, sprinkle with crumbs, bake.

Use chopped or grated onion with tomato if desired. Sauce Imperial may
be used.

=★ Nutmese and Corn=

Place nicely seasoned, canned or grated fresh corn in layers with dice
or small pieces of nutmese. Sprinkle with cracker dust or browned flour
No. 1. Heat in moderate oven. This simple dish is very pleasing.

=Nutmese Pie with Potato Crust=

Prepare nutmese pie the same as trumese pie, p. 167. Cover with nicely
seasoned mashed potato. Pour a little cream, oil or melted butter over
and bake until top is delicately browned.

Sprinkle with chopped parsley, or, chopped parsley may be mixed with
the potato. Universal or rice crust may be used.

=Hashed Potato Crust for Nutmese=

Use sauce No. 9 with nutmese and cover with well seasoned hashed or
hashed creamed potatoes and brown in oven.

=Nutmese and Potato Pie with Pastry Crust=

Use sauce 43 or 14 with or without sage and onion, drop into it chunks
or slices of fresh boiled potato, lay thin slices of nutmese over,
cover with pastry crust and bake in moderate oven.

=Apple and Nutmese Pie=

Make the same as apple pie, using enough less apple to make room for a
layer of nutmese, and only about half as much sugar. Serve for luncheon
or early supper.

=Nutmese Croquettes or Patties=

Use nutmese in recipe of trumese croquettes, No. 2. Shape into patties
if preferred. Serve with green peas or on a bed of mashed turnip
sprinkled with chopped parsley.

Nutmese may be used instead of trumese in many dishes not mentioned.


TRUMESE AND NUTMESE DISHES

=Nut Fricassee=

Put equal quantities of trumese and nutmese in small pieces into baking
dish. Pour nut and tomato bisque, p. 93, over and bake in moderate oven
until nicely browned.

=★ Nut Fricassee with Rigatoni=

    1-1¼ cup rigatoni
    1 lb. nutmese
    ¾-1 lb. trumese
    2 or 3 inferior stalks of celery with tops on
    nut butter, flour
    salt, water, cream

Make a thin nut gravy, simmer in it the stalks of celery, bruised and
tied together (for convenience), and the cooked rigatoni. When the
sauce is well flavored, remove the celery and add the nut meats cut
into convenient pieces; and lastly, a little cream.

Rigatoni is macaroni in large, round, corrugated pieces.

A few green peas may be served on each plate with the fricassee.

=★ Nut Corn Pudding=

Put layers of sliced trumese and nutmese in baking dish and sprinkle
finely-sliced celery between. Cover with green corn pudding, p. 116,
sprinkle with crumbs and bake 20-30 m. in moderate oven. If canned corn
is used bake only long enough to heat through and brown over the top.
Serve at once.

=Nut Pastry Pie=

Line as deep a pie pan as you have with a rich pastry crust; cover the
bottom with a thin layer of cold drawn butter, sprinkle with chopped
onion and parsley and lay on very thin slices of trumese and nutmese.
Fill the pan in this way. Cover with crust as for fruit pies and bake.
Slip on to chop tray and garnish with parsley or spinach leaves. Cut
the same as fruit pies and serve with drawn butter. The pie may be sent
to the table in the pan in which it was baked. It may be served as a
complete course, or with celery, jelly, or small boiled onions. It may
also constitute the principal dish of a luncheon.

=★ Cream Timbales of Trumese and Nutmese=

    ½ cup each minced nutmese and trumese
    1 cup soft white bread crumbs
    ½ cup milk
    5 tablespns. heavy cream
    whites of five eggs

Put the bread crumbs and milk in a sauce pan or double boiler over
the fire, stir until smooth. Remove from the fire, cool, add trumese
and nutmese which have been rubbed to a cream together. Stir all very
smooth. Add salt and cream and rub through a fine colander. Chop in the
stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Put into small timbale molds which have
rounds of buttered paper in the bottom, decorated with truffles or not.
Set in pan of hot (not boiling) water. Cover with oiled paper and
bake in moderate oven about 20 m., or until firm in the center. Remove
molds from water, carefully. Let stand a moment. Invert on to thin
rounds of toast and place in center of chop tray or platter. Surround
with tiny molds of jelly, button mushrooms, green peas, or small
spoonfuls of thick cream sauce, according to the sauce to be served
with them, whether a cream or creamed mushroom sauce.

Trumese alone may be used for the timbales.

[Illustration: PROTOSE TIMBALE WITH INDIVIDUAL SPINACH SOUFFLÉS]

[Illustration: NUT PASTRY PIE, P. 180]


ROASTS

Roasts are among the most popular of vegetarian dishes. In the home,
in sanitariums and in our vegetarian restaurants they are always in
demand. Except soups there are no dishes that we are so often asked to
give the recipes for as our roasts. We always plan to have left-overs
that will be good for them, as the proper combination of different
ingredients is very satisfying, and richer flavors are often developed
by reheating foods.

When we start to make a roast, we gather up the suitable ingredients:
for instance, a few baked beans or mashed lentils, a little cold boiled
rice, some tomato macaroni, a nut cutlet or two, perhaps one or two
croquettes, a spoonful or so of tomato, some boiled onions, a few
peas or string beans or baked peanuts, may be a little corn, and the
vegetables strained out of a soup from the day before; throwing them
one after another into a pan. Then we often add a handful of nut meats,
chopped or whole, a little sage, sometimes sliced celery or chopped
onion, occasionally a little browned flour; never potatoes unless an
infinitesimal quantity. Then we scatter over some coarse bread or
zwieback crumbs or granella and pour on consommé, broth or gravy, some
soup we happen to have, or water, and add one or more beaten eggs,
according to the number and size of the loaves; just enough to hold the
ingredients together. The eggs may be omitted, but we are more sure
that the roast will turn out of the tin well without being too solid,
by using them; then, too, they add to the nutritive value of the roast.

Mix well, but not to pastiness, adding more crumbs or liquid as
required to make a rather soft mixture. Allowance must be made for the
swelling of the crumbs, if they are very dry, and the thickening of
the eggs. More salt may be necessary but not much if the foods were
seasoned before. The roast should not be as salt as the gravy that is
to be served with it.

When of the desired consistency put the mixture into well oiled molds
or brick shaped tins, taking care that the corners are well filled.
Brush the tops with oil or melted butter or pour a little thin cream
over. Bake in a moderate oven in a dripping pan or covered baker
without water until the roast is well heated through and the eggs
set, then pour boiling water into the baker, cover and bake for an
hour or so longer. Remove from oven, let stand a few minutes, invert
on platter, lifting mold carefully, garnish, and send to table with a
suitable sauce. Some of the meaty flavored sauces are most appropriate.
The pieces of nut meat in the roast add much to the pleasure of
masticating it. Roasts may be warmed over by setting in pan of hot
water in the oven.

=Cutlets of Roast=

Cut cold roast into not too thin slices. Egg and crumb, or flour
only. Bake or broil and serve with or without a sauce. Some such
accompaniment as stewed onions or carrots is enjoyable. Cutlets may be
served on a bed of pilau.

Below are given the ingredients of a few roasts that were made in a
small institution at different times.

=No. 1=

Some macaroni strained out of the soup from the day before, a little
nutmese à la crême, some trumese cutlets, hard boiled eggs, a little
nutmese, sage, crumbs, eggs, consommé. The nutmese was put in the
center of the loaf in a layer.

=No. 2=

Stewed red kidney beans ground, egg macaroni ground, dry zwieback
ground, a few nuts, eggs, consommé, nutmese in layers. Served with
Sauce Imperial.

=No. 3=

Baked peanuts, rice, garlic, a little melted butter, savory tomato
gravy (made with tomato, Chili sauce, bay leaf and a little cream) a
very little sage, eggs, crumbs, soup.

=No. 4=

Macaroni, rice, peas purée, trumese cutlets, some trumese in tomato,
and nutmese, laid in the center of the loaf. Sage, eggs, crumbs, soup.

=Brazil Nut and Lentil Roast=

    3 cups coarse, dry bread crumbs
    3 cups mashed lentils (1½ cup before cooking)
    1½ cup chopped Brazil nut meats
    2 teaspns. salt
    2 cups hot water

Mix all ingredients, using more or less water according to dryness of
crumbs. Press into brick shaped tin or any convenient mold; brush with
oil or cover with thin cream. Bake in moderate oven until well heated
through, then set in pan of hot water, cover and finish baking. Serve
with sauce 6, 9, 10, 16 or 17. Flavorings of onion and browned flour,
or of sage may be used if desired.

Rice and stewed lentils are good ingredients for the foundation of a
roast.

=Black Walnut Roast=

    5 cups medium dry bread crumbs
    2 cups coarse chopped black walnut meats
    1½ teaspn. sage or winter savory
    1½ teaspn. salt
    2½ cups hot water

Bake as Brazil nut and lentil roast. Serve with sauce 16, 17 or 45.


LEGUMES

The mature, dry seeds only are considered under this head.

Legumes--peas, beans and lentils form an important part of the
vegetarian dietary, containing as they do a so much larger proportion
of the muscle-building material than flesh meats, and being at the same
time inexpensive.

Another advantage is that they are grown in considerable variety in
nearly all countries.

We have beans--white, large and small; colored, of all shades and
sizes; peas--dry, green and yellow, split and whole, chick peas and
other varieties; lentils--German or Austrian, red or Egyptian. The
ground nut or peanut is also a legume.

Chick peas are found in the Italian groceries or macaroni stores. They
have a rich flavor peculiar to themselves.

The Soy bean, most common in China and India, has almost no starch and
is richer in oil than any other legume.

The legumes require a prolonged, slow cooking to render them digestible
and to develop their rich flavors. The hulls of some are difficult
of digestion. It is for this reason that we suggest rubbing legumes
through a colander in so many recipes. Experiments have proven, also,
that a larger percentage of their nutritive value is assimilated when
the hulls are excluded.

Parboiling causes beans to be flat and tasteless; then the need is
felt of a piece of pork or at least a lump of butter; while if they
are put at once, without soaking, into the water in which they are to
be cooked, their own rich, characteristic flavor (which nothing can
replace) will be retained.

The large, dark flowering beans and a few other colored ones are
exceptions, and should be parboiled, as their flavor is so rich that it
may be denominated “strong.”

Nearly all legumes for stewing or baking should be put into boiling
salted water (most authorities to the contrary notwithstanding), to
keep them from cooking to pieces and to preserve their color and
flavor. In sections where the altitude is great, however, legumes must
be soaked for several hours and be put to cooking in cold, soft water;
even then a longer time will be required for cooking than nearer the
sea level.

The water may be rendered soft by boiling and settling, if necessary.
Soft or distilled water will cause legumes to be more digestible at any
altitude. Rain water is the very best. Most legumes about double in
bulk in cooking.

=★ Mashed Lentils=

“Rice is good, but lentils are my life.”--_Hindu proverb_.

Do not waste time by looking lentils over by handfuls, but put them
into a large, flat colander, give them a shake or two to remove the
fine dirt, slide them to one side of the colander, then with the
fingers draw a few at a time toward you, looking for particles of sand
or gravel. Pick these out but do not pay any attention to the wheat,
chaff or poor lentils. Those will come out in the washing in much less
time than it takes to pick them out and if a grain or two of wheat is
left it will do no harm.

When you are sure all the gravel is out, set the colander into a dish
pan and pour cold water over the lentils. Stir with the hand until all
but the waste matter has settled to the bottom; then carefully pour
the water off. Repeat the process until all objectionable substances
are removed. Rinse the colander up and down in water, drain the
lentils and put immediately into a large quantity of boiling water in
a broad-bottomed vessel. (The shape of the utensil has much to do with
the drying out without scorching.)

Let the lentils boil fast for a short time, then simmer without
stirring. If they are stirred after they begin to soften they will
scorch. Now keep the vessel over a slow, even fire until the lentils
are well dried out. The drying may be finished in the oven if the dish
is covered so the lentils will not become hard on the top. This drying
is imperative. It develops a rich flavor that we do not get without it.

When well dried, add a little water and rub the lentils, a few at a
time, through a fine colander with a potato masher. (Do not deceive
yourself by thinking that you can get along faster by putting a large
quantity into the colander at once.)

Throw the hulls into a dish of boiling water. At the last, stir the
hulls well and rub again in the colander, reserving what goes through
this time for soups and gravies.

When all the lentils are through the colander (of course care should be
taken to keep them hot during the process), add plenty of salt and beat
until smooth and creamy. Keep hot in a double boiler, covered, till
serving time. Beat again just before serving. Serve piled in rocky form
or in smooth mound on hot platter (or in a hot covered dish if to be
long on the table), with different garnishes: a wreath of celery tops,
sprays of parsley or chervil, spinach leaves or cooked vegetables.
Serve with sauce 16, 17, 53 or 54.

Do not be afraid of the simple dishes; they are the best.

=Mashed Lentils--Rice=

Make well in center of lentil mound and fill with sauce 8, 53 or 54.
Surround mound with hot boiled rice; garnish with green.

=★ Mashed Peas=

Prepare dried green peas the same as mashed lentils. Serve with sauce
16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 57 or 59.

Sauce 1, flavored or not, combines nicely with peas. Serve mashed peas
and rice with sauce 16 sometimes.

=Mashed Beans=

Sauce 16, 18, 19, 34, 57, 58 or 75, or Mayonnaise or French dressing
are all suitable for mashed beans. Some beans will all go through the
colander in mashing.

=★ Variegated Meat=

Put different colored mashed legumes, for instance, red and white
beans, or red and white beans and green peas, lentils and white
beans (sometimes red beans also), green peas and red beans, yellow
peas and red or black beans, or green and yellow peas, red and white
kidney beans and green peas, or red and black beans with green peas
into a mold or a brick-shaped tin dipped in cold water, in straight
or irregular layers. Press down close, cover and set in a cold place
until firm. Unmold and slice, or, send loaf to table whole on platter
garnished with lettuce or spinach leaves. Pass Improved Mayonnaise
(with chopped parsley) or French dressing, olive oil or Chili sauce.
This makes a good summer Sabbath dinner dish.

The Salad Entrée dressing is delightful with mashed legumes.

=★ Peas Pie--Corn Crust=

  _Crust_--

    2 cans (1 qt., 16 ears) of corn not very moist
    2 or 3 eggs
    1 cup milk
    salt

Beat eggs, add corn, milk and salt.

Put mashed green peas in oiled baking dish, cover with crust, bake only
till the eggs in the crust are set; serve at once. No sauce.

=Lentil Pie--Potato Crust=

Cover mashed lentils in baking dish with nicely seasoned mashed potato,
brown in oven; serve with sauce 6, 16, 49, 51, 53 or 54.

=Lentil Pie--Universal Crust=

Mashed lentils, not too dry, flavored with browned flour and chopped
onion, a little sage also if desired, with universal crust. Serve with
sauce 1, 16, 43 or 53. A rich pastry crust may be used.

=Mashed Peas--Macaroni or Vermicelli=

Cook macaroni or vermicelli with garlic, or onion and garlic. Put into
thick cream sauce and serve around rocky mound of mashed peas.

=Creamed Beans=

    1 pint white beans
    1 tablespn. butter
    1 tablespn. flour
    1 large cup milk
    1 teaspn. salt
    2 eggs
    crumbs

Cook and mash beans according to directions for mashed lentils; add
salt, and cream sauce made with butter, flour and milk; then eggs
beaten. Turn into oiled baking dish, sprinkle with crumbs, bake a
delicate brown, serve at once. The eggs may be omitted but the beans
are delightfully light with them.

Colored beans, peas and lentils may be prepared in the same way.

=Lentils--Poached Eggs=

Spread a half-inch layer of mashed lentils on slightly moistened rounds
of toast and place a nicely poached egg on each. Garnish.

=Bean Croquettes=

Shape dry mashed beans into thick croquettes (oiling the hands or
dipping them in hot water occasionally), coat delicately with oil
or melted butter, heat in oven till beginning to crack a little, no
more. Sprinkle with chopped parsley, serve with Sauce Amèricaine,
Sauce Imperial, or Mayonnaise or French dressing, or with a garnish of
lemon rings with parsley butter, p. 163. Any seasoning but salt in the
croquettes spoils them.

=Lentil Croquettes=

Prepare the same as bean croquettes, serve with any sauce given for
mashed lentils, or with small boiled onions sometimes. A little browned
flour and chopped onion may be used in the croquettes. Rice and lentil
croquettes may be served with Boundary Castle sauce.

=Peas Croquettes=

Shape the same as bean croquettes, adding a little finely-sliced
tender celery if desired. Serve with sauces given for mashed peas. The
croquettes are very pretty rolled in parsley before baking. Chop the
parsley, not too fine, and spread it out thin with spaces between the
particles on a vegetable board. Roll the croquettes over it once.

=Legume Patties=

Shape mashed peas, beans or lentils into thick flat cakes instead of
into croquettes, and serve with suitable sauces.

=Peas Timbales=

    1 cup mashed peas
    2 eggs
    a few drops of onion juice
    ½ tablespn. melted butter or 1 of cream
    ⅔ teaspn. salt

Mix all with beaten eggs, bake in a single or in individual molds well
oiled, in pan of hot water until firm.

(Very finely sliced celery may be used instead of onion juice. Peas
and eggs only may be used for plain timbales). Serve with cream sauce.
Finely sliced celery, a few whole green peas, a little stewed corn or a
few pieces of tomato pulp may be added to the sauce.

The individual timbales may be used as a garnish for some vegetable
dish, giving meat value to it. Decorate timbales with egg daisies,
carrots, or anything desired.

=Rice and Lentil Timbales=

Line a well oiled mold with a ¾ in. layer of boiled rice. Nearly fill
the center with mashed lentils, cover with rice, steam or bake 20 m. to
½ hr. Unmold carefully, garnish, serve with cream, brown, mushroom or
any suitable sauce.

Mashed peas may take the place of lentils, with sauce of celery, onion
or tomato cream.

=Lentil Roast=

    1 pt. lentils
    ½ cup raw nut butter
    a few bread crumbs, or
    ¼ cup browned flour No. 1
    1 small onion chopped
    salt
    sage
    1 egg
    ⅝-¾ cup water

Cook and mash lentils, add nut butter and onion which have been cooked
with salt ½ hour in the water, then the browned flour or the crumbs,
sage and beaten egg; more salt and water or crumbs if necessary for
right consistency. Press into well oiled mold or brick-shaped tin,
bake, covered, in pan of water about 1 hour or until firm. Dry in oven
10 m., out of water if necessary. Let stand in warm place 5 m. Unmold
on to platter, garnish. Serve with sauce 6, 16, 18, 54 or 57.

Flavorings of roast may be varied or omitted.

1 cup chopped nuts might be used in place of raw nut butter.

1 cup stewed tomato may be used for liquid.

For people with good digestion, the lentils may be ground through a
food cutter instead of being put through the colander.

=Chick Peas Roast=

Substitute chick peas for lentils in lentil roast.

=Peas Roast=

1 pt. mashed, dry, split or whole green peas, 1 to 2 eggs or whites of
eggs only, or a little fresh cracker dust. Bake as lentil roast until
firm only. Serve with tomato cream sauce or almond cream, tomato or
celery cream sauce. Peas require no flavoring, but celery or celery
salt may be added, serving with plain cream sauce.

=Sister Boulter’s Red Kidney Bean Loaf=

Cook and crush or grind red kidney beans, add salt and sage, mold.
Serve cold, sliced, with or without oil, or use for sandwiches. A few
crumbs may be added if necessary, the loaf baked, and served hot with
any suitable accompaniment.

=Purées of Legumes=

Add sufficient water, nut or dairy cream or milk to mashed beans, peas
or lentils to make of the consistency of a thick batter. No sauce is
required.

=★ Rich Baked Beans=

Wash beans and get them into boiling salted water, in the bean pot,
as quickly as possible. For each pint of beans use 1¼ to 1¾ teaspn. of
salt. Add plenty of water at first, perhaps three times the quantity of
beans. Put into a hot oven until they begin to boil, then reduce the
temperature to such a degree as will keep them just simmering for from
12 to 24 hours. The old-fashioned New England baked beans were kept in
a brick oven for three days, and each day they were better than the
last.

Do not stir the beans after the skins begin to break. When necessary
to add more water, pour it boiling over the top and let it settle in
gradually. A gentle shaking may be helpful. After they are swollen and
softened they should not have too much water on at a time, nor be baked
too fast; if so, they will be “mushy.”

They are most generally liked slightly juicy when served--not too wet
nor too dry, but just “juicy.” They may be served with the Salad Entrée
dressing, Improved Mayonnaise or French dressing, with oil or lemon
juice or with Chili sauce, but they all spoil that delightful bean
flavor in the rich, thick juice. Beans have a characteristic flavor
which is destroyed by the addition of anything but salt and water.
Molasses, cream, nut butter and tomato are all good in their place, but
that is not in baked beans if we attain to the keenest enjoyment of
the bean flavor. We get the rich red color, without the rank molasses
taste, by prolonged baking. Cream and milk deaden the flavor, and nut
butter and tomato change it.

Those who taste our baked beans for the first time exclaim, “I would
not have believed it,” and it is hard for them to believe that there is
no meat in them.

Bake Red Kidney and other varieties of beans the same as white beans.

For those who think they must have the molasses, use 1 teaspn. molasses
(or 2 teaspns. for a very strong molasses flavor) 2 teaspns. oil and
1½-1¾ teaspn. salt to each pint of beans.

=★ Western Baked Beans=

Boil beans in salted water until the skins are broken. Put into a
pudding dish with plenty of water and bake in a slow oven until dry and
mealy and delicately browned over the top.

=Baked Split Yellow Peas=

    1 qt. (1½ lb.) split peas
    1-2 tablespns. browned flour
    ½ cup strained stewed tomato
    3-3½ teaspns. salt

Wash peas, put into bean pot, add browned flour, tomato and salt which
have been mixed together, then turn over them two or three times their
quantity of boiling water. Stir well. When boiling, regulate the heat
of the oven so as to keep them gently simmering for from 5 to 7 hours.
Do not stir after they are first put to cooking. They require greater
care than beans to keep them from breaking. However, if they do not
keep their shape they will be of a jelly-like consistency not at all
objectionable. May add 2 large onions sliced fine.

=Baked Split Yellow Peas No. 2=

    1 qt. peas
    ¼ cup roasted nut butter
    1 cup tomato
    3-3½ teaspns. salt

Rub nut butter smooth with tomato and add with salt and boiling water
to peas. Raw nut butter and browned flour may be substituted for the
roasted nut butter.

=★ Baked Split Green Peas=

Wash peas and put into a baking dish with 1 teaspn. of salt to each
pint of peas and 2 to 2½ times the quantity of water. Cook on top of
the stove until tender (about 1 hour), then put, covered, into a slow
oven and bake until dry and mealy all through, which will not be long
if there was not too much water in them. Peas lose their delicate
flavor and develop a strong taste if cooked too long. If this amount of
water is too great, use a little less. Serve if desired in the dish in
which they were baked, with sauces given for mashed peas. A mint and
celery flavored raw nut butter sauce is nice with them.

When desired very smooth they may be put through a colander. They may
be used in soups and in all dishes where mashed peas are required.

=Baked Lentils--great favorites=

Stew lentils with salt, with or without chopped onion, until nearly
tender.

Add a little cream, turn into a baking dish and finish in the oven.
Serve juicy.

A little thick cream poured over the lentils during the last of the
baking gives a nice crusty finish to the top.

=Stewed Beans=

Put red kidney and other beans with tough skins into boiling unsalted
water and cook until nearly but not quite tender before adding the
salt. Common white, Lima and all beans with tender skins must be put
into boiling salted water at first. After a short time of rapid boiling
let beans just simmer until tender, then add a little heavy cream and
stand back where they will keep hot but will not boil, for a half hour
or longer. A little raw nut butter may be cooked with them sometimes,
or, cocoanut cream may be substituted for dairy cream.

Red kidney and some of the richer varieties may be served with boiled
rice or in a mashed potato border.

=Stewed Split Green Peas=

Cook peas in salted water ¾ to 1 hour, add cream, heat and serve. Two
parts stewed dried or green sweet corn to one of peas, may be added
sometimes.

=Flowering Beans=

which have no equal in flavor, should be put into a large quantity of
cold water, brought to the boiling point, boiled for 10 m., drained and
put to cooking in boiling unsalted water. Add salt when nearly tender.
Try them.

=Stewed Beans in Bean Sauce=

Mash a few of the stewed beans, add cream, or milk and butter with the
water from the beans, more salt if necessary; blend well, pour over
remainder of beans, heat. Serve on toast or as preferred.

=Stewed Lentils--for people with good digestion=

Cook lentils with raw nut butter, onion, garlic, browned flour and
salt, until tender, rich and juicy. Serve without mashing with boiled
rice or with some of the large sizes of macaroni, cooked.

Lentils may be cooked plain with salt and seasoned with cream or butter
at the last.

=Ragout of Chick Peas--especially delicious=

Soak the peas over night. Cook and cook and cook in the water they
were soaked in. When about half done add garlic, onion, a very
little browned flour, tomato and salt. Serve with dressing, rice,
dumplings--steamed or baked, or on toast.

=Cabbage Leaf Rolls of Lentils=

    1 cup lentils
    1 cup rice
    2 tablespns. raw nut butter
    onion
    sage
    salt
    1 loose head of cabbage
    a little tomato if desired

Boil cabbage leaves in salted water 5-8 m., or sprinkle with salt, pour
boiling water over and let stand 20 m. to ½ hour. Refresh with cold
water, drain.

Cook lentils till beginning to get tender but not until broken, drain
and save water.

Cook rice in salted water until swollen but not soft (about 15 m.),
drain if necessary and save the water. Mix lentils, rice, sage, chopped
onion, raw nut butter and salt smooth with a little of the lentil
water. Put a tablespoonful of this mixture in the center of each
cabbage leaf. Fold the sides of the leaf over and roll into croquette
shape. Pack close in layers in an oiled baking dish. (A flaring granite
pan would do nicely.) Pour the rice water and lentil water over, with
a little tomato if desired, and add enough boiling, slightly salted
water to cover. Press a plate over the rolls, cover and bake ¾ to 1
hour in a moderate oven.

Drain, save liquid, remove plate, invert dish on to chop tray, leaving
rolls in a mound. Thicken liquid slightly and turn over rolls or serve
separately. Garnish mound.

Dairy butter may be used in place of raw nut butter.

[Illustration: POACHED EGGS AND POACHERS]

[Illustration: VARIEGATED MEAT, P. 186]

=Savory Hash=

Equal quantities mashed lentils and boiled rice or chopped potato,
seasoned with sage or onion. Add water or cream and salt. A few soaked
and chopped dried olives may be added to the hash.

“The pea and the lentil are roasted in the Mediterranean countries and
form there a regular article of food. In India peas are parched in hot
sand. The chick-pea, as found by experiment, can be parched over coals
in a few moments and thus be made edible. The taste reminds one of
pop corn and roasted chestnuts. A slight bitterness is present, due,
probably, to the skin which does not slip off in roasting as does the
skin of the peanut. When this skin is removed before roasting, as it
may be by a half hour’s soaking, the product is improved.

“Our common split pea is also palatable when parched. Parched peas are
too hard for any but the strongest teeth, and, as used in India, they
are ground and cooked after parching. The roasted chick-pea is also
used as a substitute for coffee.”--_Mary Hinman Abel, Farmers’ Bulletin
No. 121, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture._


EGGS

“Milk and eggs should not be classed with flesh meat. In some cases the
use of eggs is beneficial.”

“While their use will become more and more unsafe as disease in animals
increases, they should not be discarded entirely, when other foods to
supply the needed elements cannot be obtained. Great care, however,
should be taken to obtain milk from healthy cows and eggs from healthy
fowls that are well fed and well cared for.”

Though eggs are, to some extent, stimulating, they do not contain the
poisonous, excrementitious matter found in the flesh of dead animals;
and no animal life is destroyed by their use.

As eggs, at present, form so important a part of the Vegetarian
dietary, care should be taken to prepare them attractively and
palatably.


Suggestions

Only strictly fresh eggs should be used for any purpose. There is
danger in stale eggs.

The beaten raw egg is usually considered the most digestible, but there
are some with whom lightly cooked eggs, as “Eggs in the Shell” agree
best, and still others upon whom the soft yolk acts almost like poison,
who can take omelets or scrambled eggs better, where the whites and
yolks are thoroughly mingled (when cooked in not too large a quantity
of oil).

Occasionally we find a person with whom the white of the egg disagrees;
but very seldom.

Try taking the beaten white of an egg when you have a sour stomach. It
is very soothing, also, to an irritated, sensitive stomach.

The white of an egg relieves the pain and prevents inflammation when
applied quickly to a burn or scald.

A few sliced Brazil nuts or filberts or broken pieces of other nuts
added to omelets or scrambled eggs aid mastication.

Salt should not be put into the water for poaching eggs; it renders
them less digestible.

The cooked yolk of the egg is most digestible when cooked long enough
to be dry and mealy, and the white when just jellied.

Never use milk in scrambled eggs or omelets. The casein of the milk
hardens with cooking and renders the eggs tough; besides, the flavor
of the eggs is much finer with water, and omelets are lighter. Cream
spoils the flavor though it does not toughen the egg as does milk.

Always bake soufflés, puff omelets, cakes, all things to be made light
with egg, slowly, and well from the bottom, so that they will stay up,
after rising. Serve soufflés and puff omelets as soon as done.

For custards or any thickening, beat eggs just sufficiently to mingle,
not to a foam.

Drop yolks of eggs in cold water to keep them from drying up when
whites only are desired, and lift carefully from the water with a
teaspoon when ready to use.

Add a trifle of salt to whites of eggs before beating; they will be
lighter.

Stand yolks of eggs in half the shell on a wrinkled towel while waiting
to prepare the whites for egg creams and other dishes.

When eggs are used freely in breads, cakes or puddings, other proteid
foods will not be required, so they need not add to the expense of the
meal.

=Eggs In the Shell, or Curdled Eggs=

The objection to the “soft boiled” egg is that the white is hard while
the yolk is soft. To obviate this difficulty, put from 1 to 4 eggs into
boiling water, 1 pint for each egg (cover if the dish is broad and
shallow; if deep, leave uncovered), and let stand off from the fire for
from 5 to 10 minutes according to the age of the eggs. Fresh laid eggs
will cook in a shorter time than those several days old.

When a larger number of eggs is required, use a smaller proportion of
water and let them stand on the back of the range where the water will
be below the boiling point, for 5 minutes.

The most accurate way to obtain the desired result is to keep the water
at the temperature (by the thermometer) of 168 to 170 degs. for 10
minutes; never allowing it to go above 170 nor below 168. The flavor of
eggs cooked in this way is as much more delicate and delightful as is
the consistency.

=Roasted Eggs=

Prick the shells of the eggs several times at the pointed end to
prevent their bursting during cooking, set them on the large end in the
hot sand or ashes under the camp fire, cover with leaves, hot sand and
embers and cook for 10 minutes. When opened they will be smooth and of
a velvety consistency. The same result may be obtained by putting eggs
in the hot ashes under the grate of the kitchen range.

=Poached Eggs=

In an oiled, shallow pan have unsalted boiling water deep enough to
be at least ½ in. above the eggs. Slide the broken eggs (only fresh
laid eggs will poach nicely) into the perfectly boiling water, singly,
or all from one large dish. Set pan on asbestos pad, cover and leave
where the water will keep hot but will not boil, until the eggs are
jelly-like. Remove carefully from the water with a small oiled skimmer
and cut off the ragged edges with a biscuit cutter. Nothing is more
offensive to the eye than a rough ragged poached egg.

Besides the usual toast, poached eggs may be served on cream toast,
round slices of broiled trumese, on hash or creamed vegetables, or in
shallow nests of boiled rice, mashed potato or spinach. Do not forget
the garnish, as there is no place where a spray of parsley gives a
better effect than on poached eggs.

Or, place oiled muffin rings in the pan of water and break an egg into
each ring; take up with griddle cake turner and remove the ring.

The most nearly perfect of all, however, are eggs poached in the
Buffalo Steam Poacher after the following method:

Have the lower part of the poacher ⅔ full of _boiling_ water; set the
_well oiled_ poacher cups, each containing an egg, into their places;
cover, let stand over the hot fire just a moment to allow the cover to
become filled with steam, then set off from the fire. Leave, covered
tight, for 6 m., when you will have eggs beautifully jellied all
through, which (if the cups were oiled sufficiently will slide out on
to whatever you wish to serve them on.)

Sometimes poach eggs in thin cream or in milk and butter, lay on to
slices of toast, halves of biscuit or large thin wafers, and pour the
cream around.

=Poached Yolks of Eggs=

Drop yolks, one at a time, into rapidly boiling water; keep them
rolling, by rapid boiling, for at least 10 m.; then stand where they
will boil more slowly till done, 20-25 m.

=Poached Whites of Eggs=

To be cut in fancy shapes for garnishing.

Break whites of eggs into thoroughly oiled cup or bowl, set in pan of
hot water, with something to keep the dish from touching the bottom of
the pan, and leave over the fire until the white is set.

=Poached Beaten Eggs=

Beat eggs to a foam with water, or any desired addition, and cook in
steam poacher.

=Creamed Eggs=

Break eggs into a shallow baking dish, cover with thin cream and bake
in a moderate oven; sprinkle with salt and dot with parsley leaves
before serving. Or, bake or steam singly in ramekins or custard cups.
Rye bread crumbs may be sprinkled in the bottom of the dish and over
the eggs for variety, also ground pine nuts.

=Rice with Poached Eggs=

Steam rice in shallow dish; when done, make depressions for the
required number of eggs; break one into each hollow, set dish in
steamer for 2 m., or till whites are set, sprinkle with chopped parsley
and send to table. Creamed potatoes may be substituted for rice
sometimes, and either may be baked in the oven by covering with a pan.

=Poached Eggs--Creamed Celery=

Put nicely poached eggs on rounds of toast and arrange in a circle on
a chop tray; fill the center with celery in cream sauce. Garnish with
leaves of spinach.

=Hard Boiled Eggs=

Put eggs into warm water, bring to just below the boiling point, 200
degs. and keep at that temperature for about 30 m. Drop for a moment
into cold water before removing the shells. Or, when necessary, boil
rapidly for 10-20 m.

Hard eggs agree with some stomachs better than soft ones.

=Italian Eggs=

Cut hard boiled eggs in halves lengthwise, lay on to cutlets of corn
meal porridge and pour Italian sauce around.

=Creamed Eggs on Toast=

Serve halves or quarters or slices of hard boiled eggs on toast with
cream sauce, plain, or flavored with celery or onion, with chopped
parsley sprinkled over. Plain or tomato drawn butter may be substituted
for cream sauce.

=Eggs and Macaroni=

Cook macaroni in 2-in. lengths, in salted water with onion and garlic
or garlic only. Drain and arrange in nest fashion on chop tray. Lay
whole, shelled eggs in center, pour cream of tomato sauce around and
over nest. Sprinkle with parsley. Drawn butter or cream sauce may be
used.

Or, cut eggs in halves, crosswise, remove yolks and mix to a paste with
melted butter, salt, onion juice and chopped parsley. Fill whites with
the mixture and arrange on bed of macaroni. Pour sauce over. The roast
gravy or some of the mushroom sauces may be used.

=Eggs With Sauce=

Hard boiled eggs, whole or in halves, may be served with cream, cream
of tomato or mint sauce, or with sauce Imperial or fruit sauces or
jellies; with mint sauce on broiled nutmese.

=Stuffed Eggs=

Cut hard boiled eggs in halves, lengthwise, remove yolks and add to
them bread or roll crumbs soaked in cream, a little chopped parsley
and salt. Rub all together until smooth, add raw egg (or yolk only) to
bind, fill spaces in the whites of eggs and press the halves together.
Add beaten whole egg to the mixture remaining, dip eggs into it, roll
in crumbs and heat in oven or steamer, covered, until just warmed
through. Serve with any desired sauce.

A little onion juice may be added to the yolk mixture, or nutmese or
trumese cut very fine, with or without chopped mushrooms. Mashed potato
may be substituted for bread crumbs.

The eggs may be served as a garnish for green peas or on slices of
toast with or without sauce.

=Eggs with Ripe Olives=

    3 eggs
    12 (or more) olives, chopped coarse
    French dressing
    chopped parsley

Cut eggs in halves crosswise, remove yolks and mix with olives and
dressing, return to the whites, stand on leaves of lettuce and sprinkle
with parsley. Pour dressing around. Improved Mayonnaise dressing is
suitable also. May garnish with whole olives.

=Pickled Eggs=

_Pickle_--2 parts each of lemon juice and water, ⅓ part sugar, salt and
a little celery salt. Heat to boiling, pour over hard boiled eggs with
a few slices of red beet. Let stand 24 hours.

=Eggs à la Salade=

Cut hard boiled eggs in halves lengthwise, remove yolks, rub through
wire strainer and mix to a smooth paste with Improved Mayonnaise
dressing (flavored with onion or garlic if desired), fill the whites
and press the halves together. Lay in nests of shredded lettuce dotted
with the dressing.

Or, rub whites through strainer, place around the inside of nests of
shredded lettuce; mix yolks with dressing, shape into small eggs and
place in nests.

=Shirred Eggs=

Butter and crumb individual dishes, break 1 or 2 eggs into each, set
over pan of hot water in oven and bake until eggs are set. The dish may
be rubbed with a cut clove of garlic.

If preferred, sprinkle oiled griddle with crumbs, set buttered muffin
rings on it, pressing them down firmly, and drop an egg into each ring.
Bake. Sprinkle with chopped parsley, serve on toast with any desired
sauce.

=Scrambled Eggs.=

Put oil in pan and heat very hot but not smoking. Turn in eggs which
have been broken and salted but not beaten. As they set, draw carefully
from the bottom of the pan with a spoon without turning over. When all
are set but not hard, slide quickly (leaving the shining side up) on
to a plate or platter. The dish must be all ready, as a moment’s delay
will overcook the eggs.

_Another Way_--Take from 1 teaspn. to 1 tablespn. of water (never milk)
for each egg; beat, and scramble as above.

Do not stir, just draw the eggs from the bottom of the pan. Cream may
be used but the flavor is inferior to the water scramble. Nut cream may
be used instead of water.

=To Scramble a Large Quantity of Eggs=

Break 3 or 4 dozens of eggs into an oiled agate or aluminum kettle,
add salt and water, beat slightly and set kettle into hot water. Stir
occasionally at first, then more often as eggs begin to set.

Do not try to keep warm long, but make fresh lots as required.

=★ Tomato Scrambled Eggs=

Take ¾-1 teaspn. thick tomato pulp to each egg, with salt. May flavor
with onion.

=★ Sour Milk Scrambled Eggs=

1 tablespn. thick sour milk to each egg, salt; cook till just done.

=Various Scrambles=

Simmer sliced celery or onion in oil a few minutes before adding eggs.
Or, add asparagus tips, green peas, mushrooms, a little boiled rice
or a few broken nuts or bits of trumese or nutmese to eggs before
scrambling.

The yolks only may be scrambled.

=★ Cream Sauce Scramble=

Add 3 eggs to each half-cup of hot cream sauce; mix until done. Garnish
with sliced tomato. Mushrooms may be added to the cream sauce before
the eggs. Any desired sauce may be used.

=Florentine Scrambled Eggs=

Spread nicely scrambled eggs on rounds of moistened toast and place a
broiled or baked half of tomato on top. Garnish with parsley or spinach
leaves or with lettuce and fringed celery.

=Egg Croquettes=

  _Sauce_--

    1 tablespn. butter
    2-2⅔ tablespns. flour
    1 cup milk or thin cream
    1 teaspn. onion juice
    1 teaspn. salt
    6 hard boiled eggs, chopped

The whites of eggs may be rubbed through a wire strainer or a ricer.
Make sauce the usual way; cool; add the eggs and shape into croquettes,
egg, crumb and bake. A few cooked chopped fresh or dried mushrooms may
be added with the eggs.

=Egg and Rice Croquettes=

    2 cups boiled rice
    ¼ cup cream
    oil or melted butter
    3-4 hard boiled eggs, chopped or the whites riced
    grated onion or finely-sliced celery, or both
    chopped parsley

Shape, heat in oven, serve with cream sauce, with or without peas or
celery.


OMELETS

The making of an omelet is very simple, requiring just a little
practice, and it is by far the most attractive way of serving eggs.

It is better to make several small omelets of 3 or 4 eggs each than
one very large one. Six eggs is the most that can be handled at all
properly.

Use 1 teaspn. to 1 tablespn. of water to each egg. The water may be
omitted entirely.

Eggs may be beaten a very little, or until light and foamy.

Omelet pans should not be used for anything else. To keep them smooth,
rub with soft pieces of paper or a cloth after using, and occasionally
scour them with salt. Do not wash them. Keep in warm, dry place.

Omelets should be served immediately, when made.

=Plain French Omelet=

    3 eggs
    1-3 tablespns. water
    ½ teaspn. salt

Beat. Have butter or oil in pan to well cover the bottom. Heat hot, but
not to smoking or brownness. Turn the eggs in and with a spatula (or
a thin bladed knife) lift the set portions, allowing the liquid part
to run underneath. When all is set, jelly-like, not hard, roll quickly
from one side into the form, as one writer says, of an “oval cushion.”
Hold omelet for a moment over the fire to take a delicate cream color
underneath. Turn on to a hot platter, the under side up, garnish and
serve.

If an omelet is quite thick it may be folded over just double.

It should be a little soft on the top before folding.

The perfect shape is higher in the center and pointed at the ends.

Olive oil, in the pan, gives a flavor much enjoyed by many.

If the oven is just right, setting the pan in the oven a moment before
or after folding puffs the omelet nicely.

The plain omelet may be varied by mixing some garnish with the eggs
and spreading it over the top before folding, or serving it around the
omelet on the platter.

When the material is to be folded in, leave the center of the omelet a
little thinner.

Accompaniments to omelets must be well seasoned and flavored.

Sweet omelets with fruits make nice desserts or luncheon dishes.

=Omelet Variations=

=Apple and Onion=--Garnish omelet with apple and onion sauce.

=Apricot=--Stewed, dried apricots folded in omelet.

=Asparagus=--Season asparagus tips with butter and salt; lay between
folds of omelet and on the top, or, pile at one side of the omelet. The
butter may be omitted and a rich cream or egg cream sauce poured over
the tips and around the omelet.

=★ Banana Cream=--Heat, do not boil cream and sugar; add banana cut
into small dice; cover omelet (which has had a little sugar beaten with
the eggs), fold, serve with wafers. Do not heat the cream after adding
the banana.

=Corn, a great favorite=--Use 1½ tablespn. nicely seasoned, rather dry
stewed corn (no water) for each egg. Mix well and cook as plain omelet.
Use 1 tablespn. grated fresh corn for each egg. Creamed dried corn may
be used.

=Crumb=--2 eggs, 2 tablespns. bread crumbs, ¼ cup milk, salt. Beat eggs
together or separately.

=Fine Herbs=--Finely-chopped fresh thyme, tarragon and chives; or,
parsley, thyme and marjoram, beaten with the eggs. Lemon butter sauce
may be spread over the omelet after it is on the platter.

=Gooseberry=--Spread omelet with not too sweet stewed gooseberries.

=Imperial=--Serve with Sauce Imperial.

=Jelly=--Spread with jelly before folding; or garnish with spoonfuls;
or unmold a small flat mold of jelly beside the omelet on the platter
and serve with it. Garnish with geranium or spinach leaves.

=Mayonnaise=--Spread or garnish with Improved Mayonnaise dressing.

=★ Mushroom=--Cook mushrooms, fresh, in their own juices, in a double
boiler with butter and salt. Cover half the omelet before folding and
garnish the folded omelet with some of the most perfect mushrooms.
Pour the liquid around. Chopped mushrooms may be used on the inside if
prepared in the same way.

=★ Another=--Broil the mushrooms, pour melted butter over and use in
the same way as above.

=Nut=--Add a few broken or coarse chopped nuts to egg mixture and
garnish top with halves of nuts.

=Onion=--Add grated or finely-sliced onion and chopped parsley to egg
mixture. Cook omelet very soft. Or, simmer sliced onions in oil till
tender (not brown), add egg mixture and cook. Or, simmer onions in oil,
drain oil into omelet pan, cook omelet and cover with onions before
folding.

=Onion and Tomato=--Simmer onions in oil, add a little drained, stewed
tomato and salt, heat and serve around omelet.

=Oyster Plant=--Cover omelet with stewed oyster plant in slices with a
little of the liquor seasoned with butter, cream or cream sauce, before
folding.

=Parsley=--Chopped parsley in omelet mixture and omelet served with
parsley butter.

=Peas-green=--Same as oyster plant omelet. The dried chick peas, cooked
and richly seasoned as on p. 194, make a delightful accompaniment.

=Peas-mashed=--1 tablespn. of mashed peas and ½ tablespn. of water to
each egg. Salt.

=Prune=--Prunes stewed in a small quantity of water so that the syrup
is rich; pitted, quartered and folded into omelet.

=Rice=--Mix boiled rice with eggs, cook soft, serve with tomato sauce
if desired.

=Tomato=--Drain stewed tomatoes, season well with butter and salt, or
salt only. Serve in and around omelet. Or, thick tomato pulp may be
added to the egg mixture. Serve omelet plain or with cream sauce.

=Trumese Salad Entrée=--Lay strips of trumese salad entrée on half of
omelet; fold, turn on to platter, pour dressing around, garnish with
parsley or spinach leaves.

=Omelet with Okra in Almond Cream Sauce--delicious=

¾ tablespn. almond butter, ⅓ cup water, salt, mix, boil; add ⅔ cup
drained stewed okra, heat. Serve in and around 3-egg omelet.

=Vegetable Pudding Omelet=

Put hot creamed vegetables--asparagus, peas, peas and carrot, or any
preferred, in bottom of pudding dish. Cover with omelet mixture, bake
in moderate oven till eggs are just creamy and delicately browned;
serve at once.

=Puff Omelet=

    2 eggs
    2 tablespns. water
    salt

Mix yolks, salt and water; beat the whites to a stiff froth with a
little salt, and chop into them the yolk mixture. Turn into a hot well
oiled pan and set on an asbestos pad back from the direct heat of the
fire. Cover and cook until the top will not stick when lightly touched
with the finger. It should take from 15 to 20 m. If cooked too rapidly
the omelet will fall. Fold, or slide on to a hot dish without folding.
Serve plain or with any desired accompaniment.

Sauces 16, 18, 44, 50 or 75 are all suitable for the puff omelet.

If the oven is not too hot, the omelet may be baked, but it should be
set on something to keep it from the bottom of the oven and may need
to have a pan turned over it. May score across the top with a hot iron
when omelet is not folded.

One egg only, makes a nice little omelet. It may be baked in a large
muffin ring (or two small) on a griddle and served on a thin slice of
toast, with or without cream sauce.

These omelets are delightful and one requires but little practice to
attain perfection in them. They will admit of the same variations as
the French omelet.

Fruit juices with a little sugar may be substituted for the water
sometimes. The water may be omitted.

Omelet may be tinted with tomato, spinach or other colors for variety.

A delightful omelet may be made by mixing 2 teaspns. of pine nut,
almond or steamed nut butter with the water.

=Foam Omelet=

Mix beaten yolks with ⅓ less water than for the puff omelet; cook until
delicately jellied, spread stiffly-beaten whites near the edge of half
the omelet; set on top grate of oven to warm. Fold and serve at once.
Omelet may be dotted with jelly before putting the whites on. Half the
beaten whites may be mixed with yolks as in puff omelets.

=Savory Puff Omelet=

    2 eggs
    2 tablespns. cream of nut butter
    2-4 tablespns. chopped, thoroughly soaked, dried olives
    chopped parsley

Add olives and parsley to yolk mixture and fold in beaten whites.

=Orange Omelet=

    2 eggs
    2 tablespns. orange juice
    2 teaspns. sugar
    salt
    bits of orange pulp with sugar

Beat yolks, add 2 teaspns. of sugar, then orange juice and then the
stiffly-beaten whites. Cook, spread half of omelet with orange pulp
sprinkled with sugar, fold, serve.

=Another=

Add orange juice and grated rind with a little vanilla to yolks, then
beaten whites as usual. When baked, fold and dust with powdered sugar.

=Grape Omelet=

Use grape juice instead of water in puff omelet. Fold and dust with
powdered sugar.

=Unroasted Nut Butter Omelet. Choice=

    2 teaspns. steamed nut butter
    1½ tablespn. water
    2 eggs

Mix nut butter, water, yolks and a little salt; add stiffly-beaten
whites and cook as puff omelet. 1½ tablespn. of cooked cream of raw nut
butter may be used if more convenient.

=Almond Butter Omelet=

1 teaspn. almond butter and ½ tablespn. water to each egg; combine and
cook as above.


BREAD AND BAKED OMELETS

Bread and baked omelets may be served with gravies, sweet sauces or
jelly, or with green peas or asparagus, or may have corn, peas, etc.,
mixed with omelet before baking. They may be made of milk, cream or
water. Water makes the lightest and most delicate omelets. Stale, not
dry, crumbs are used.

=Baked Omelet=

    2 eggs
    ½ teaspn. flour
    2 tablespns. water
    1 teaspn. oil
    salt

Beat all together or beat the whites of eggs separately, and bake in a
slow oven until set. Fold or serve without folding. A few chopped nuts
may be added when desired.

=Bread Omelet=

Pour 1 cup boiling water over 1 cup bread crumbs; let stand until soft.
Beat 6 eggs just enough to mix them, add moistened bread crumbs, salt
and a little chopped parsley. Turn into hot oiled omelet pan and bake
on top of stove or in oven. This omelet may be baked in muffin rings on
a griddle as may many omelets. Try molasses sauce with it.

=Bread and Milk Omelet=

Soak 1 cup of bread crumbs in 1 cup of sweet milk; add yolks of 3 eggs
with salt, then the stiffly-beaten whites. Cook as puff omelet. Serve
with or without jelly in the center.

=German Crumb Omelet=

    6 eggs
    1 cup water
    1 cup fine bread crumbs
    1 tablespn. corn starch
    salt
    a little chopped onion and
    parsley

Beat yolks of eggs, add corn starch blended with water, then crumbs,
salt, onion and parsley. Chop in stiffly-beaten whites. Bake in oven.

=Miss Chaffee’s Cracker Omelet=

⅔ cup of cracker crumbs, fill cup with milk; when crumbs are soft, add
well-beaten yolks of 3 eggs, then stiffly-beaten whites.

Cook as puff omelet. Fold and serve.

=Bread Omelet Pie=

Soak 1 cup soft bread crumbs in 1 cup hot milk or water, add 1
tablespoon of oil or butter, 1 teaspn. each chopped onion and parsley,
salt, and 2 well beaten eggs. Have hot, in baking dish, a thin layer of
nicely seasoned drained tomato, or trumese seasoned with oil and lemon
juice, or any desired filling; cover with the omelet and bake until
just set.

=Breaded Tomato Omelet=

¾ cup of crumbs soaked in 1 cup strained tomato. Add yolks of 3 eggs, 2
or 3 tablespns. cream, salt, chopped parsley and stiffly-beaten whites
of eggs. Bake.

=Corn Starch Omelet. Extra Good=

    3 eggs
    1½ tablespn. corn starch
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ½ cup milk

Beat yolks of eggs, corn starch and salt together; add milk gradually;
beat and chop in the stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Cook as puff omelet.

=White Sauce Omelet. Unequaled=

    1 cup rich milk
    1 tablespn. oil or butter
    5 eggs
    2 tablespns. flour
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 teaspn. sugar

Heat butter, add flour, then hot milk and salt; pour over beaten yolks
of eggs, add sugar, fold in stiffly-beaten whites; turn in to well
oiled omelet pan and cook as puff omelet.

This recipe is copied almost verbatim from “A Book for a Cook,” by
permission of the Pillsbury Flour Mills Company.

=Omelet Soufflé=

    6 eggs
    3 tablespns. powdered sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice

Beat the yolks of the eggs with the sugar, add the lemon juice, chop in
stiffly-beaten whites, heap in buttered baking dish; bake in slow oven
till set. The yolks of 4 eggs only may be used.

Top of soufflé may be dusted with sugar before baking.

=★ Omelet Soufflé No. 2=

    1 cup flour
    1 pt. milk
    1 tablespn. sugar
    1 tablespn. oil or butter
    5 eggs
    ¾ teaspn. salt

Mix flour, butter and sugar, pour boiling milk over, stirring. Boil
well.

When partially cool add yolks of eggs, then the stiffly-beaten whites
with salt; bake in a slow oven; serve plain or with maple syrup, honey,
or hard sauce.

=Egg Timbales=

    4 eggs
    ½ teaspn. salt
    a few drops of onion juice
    1 cup water, milk or thin cream

Beat eggs, salt and onion juice until blended only; add liquid
gradually. Divide equally among 6 well buttered timbale molds (common
cups will serve the purpose). Stand in a pan half filled with hot water
and bake in a moderate oven about 20 m., or till firm to the touch.
Turn out carefully on heated platter and pour bread or tomato sauce
around. 5 or 6 eggs are sometimes used.

A teaspn. of chopped parsley with or without onion, a few peas or a
little stewed corn may be added to eggs before putting into cups.

The timbales may be served on rounds of toast or of broiled trumese or
nutmese.

=Rice and Egg Timbales=

    4-6 hard boiled eggs
    2 cups boiled rice
    ¼ cup oil
    ½-1 cup finely-sliced celery
    1 tablespn. chopped parsley
    salt

Slice eggs and chop a little, leaving coarse; mix with rice, celery,
parsley, oil and salt and press into well oiled mold; set in pan of
water in oven, cover and bake ¾-1 hour. Unmold and serve with cream
sauce. Celery may be omitted and creamed celery or creamed peas served
with the loaf. Individual molds may be used.

=Scalloped Eggs and Potatoes=

    4 cold boiled potatoes
    4 hard boiled eggs
    1 pt. white sauce
    crumbs
    chopped parsley
    salt

Put alternate layers of sliced potatoes and eggs in serving dish,
sprinkle with salt, pour white sauce (with parsley stirred through it)
over. Cover with oiled crumbs and bake. Sage, savory, onion or celery
salt may be added.

=★ Scalloped Eggs and Celery=

2 large bunches celery 5 hard boiled eggs 1 pt. cream sauce

Slice and cook celery and arrange in layers with the cream sauce and
sliced hard boiled eggs, in oiled baking dish with the sauce on top.
Sprinkle with oiled crumbs, bake.

=Eggs in Perfection=

For luncheon or for an invalid

Poach yolk of egg and rub through coarse strainer; beat white stiff
with a trifle of salt and place in mound on a gilt edged plate or
small platter; dot with riced yolk, sprinkle with salt, press slightly
salted, green tinted, whipped cream through pastry tube in small
roses on to the top. Serve immediately with wafers or long strips of
zwieback.

This dish gives both the yolk and white in their most digestible form.
A little thick tomato pulp may be added to the white. The cream may be
dropped on with a teaspoon.


UNCOOKED EGG DISHES

Egg creams, in their great variety, are the most delightful ways of
serving uncooked eggs, both for desserts and for invalids.

For preparing them, the ingredients and all utensils and dishes should
be as nearly ice cold as possible.

The white of the egg should be beaten very stiff. The milk and cream
should have been sterilized.

The creams must be prepared just at the time of serving as they become
liquid and lose their creamy consistency very soon.

Set the glass or dish of cream on to a small plate with a doiley, and
if possible lay a delicate flower or leaf beside it.

The recipes are given for one egg but several may be prepared at once,
when required, by using a cake bowl for beating.

Lemon juice added to the white renders it stiffer, but other juices and
liquids soften it, so small quantities of them should be used and they
should be mixed in very lightly.

High colored fruits and juices should be poured between layers of the
egg, not mixed with it.

=Lemon Egg Cream=

Sprinkle a trifle of salt on to the white of an egg in a bowl and beat
with a revolving egg beater to a very stiff froth; then add 1 tablespn.
of sugar and beat until smooth and creamy. Remove the egg beater, chop
in lightly 2 teaspns. of lemon juice and remove ⅓ of the beaten white
to a cold plate. Add the yolk and another teaspoon of lemon juice to
the white remaining in the bowl. Chop them in lightly and quickly, not
mixing very thoroughly. Drop this egg mixture into a cold glass and on
top of it lay the white which was taken out. Serve at once.

All of the white may be beaten with the yolk if preferred. The whites
of 2 eggs and yolk of one may be used.

A company of ladies to whom I once served this cream as a dessert
pronounced it “the most delicate boiled custard” they had ever tasted.

=Raspberry Egg Cream=

Beat the white of 1 egg to a stiff froth with 1 teaspn. of sugar, chop
in the yolk with 1 tablespn. of cream, drop a spoonful or two into a
glass, then pour over a little rich red raspberry juice or drop on a
few crushed or stewed berries. Continue this until all the egg is used.
Serve at once.

A little lemon juice may be mixed with the raspberry if desired. The
cream may be omitted. A part of the white may be left for the top.
Strawberry, grape, currant and other juices may be substituted for
raspberry. Pineapple and orange juices can be mixed with the egg: they
are improved by combining with lemon juice.

=Banana Egg Cream=

Combine 1 or 2 tablespns. of fresh banana pulp and 1 tablespn. of cream
with a beaten egg, leaving a part of the white on top if desired.

=Vanilla Egg Cream=

Beat the white of an egg with 1-2 teaspns. of sugar, reserving a little
for the top; chop in the yolk with 1 tablespn. of cream and a delicate
flavoring of vanilla; serve in a glass, with white on top of yolk
mixture.

Or, for a change, beat the white and yolk separately, add half the
sugar and cream to each, flavor yolk with vanilla, pile white in a
dainty glass dish and pour yolk mixture over it. A little of the white
may be chopped with the yolk.

=Almond Egg Cream=

Use 1 teaspn. almond butter, mixed to a thick cream with water, in
place of dairy cream, in preceding recipe. Vanilla may be omitted.

=Maple or Honey Egg Cream=

Beat the white of an egg, add ⅔-1 tablespn. of maple syrup or of honey
(malt extract sometimes); chop in yolk and if desired, 1 tablespn. of
cream.

=Caramel Egg=

Beat white of 1 egg, add 2 teaspns. of sugar, beat, chop in yolk; pour
over, stirring, the hot liquid made from boiling 1½-2 tablespns. of
cereal coffee in ¾ cup of water to which 1 teaspn. of melted cocoa
butter has been added. Liquid may be added cold, with a few drops of
vanilla instead of cocoa butter.

=Egg and Milk=

Take 1-2 teaspns. of sugar and 3 tablespns. of milk, with the beaten
egg in vanilla cream.

=Egg and Hot Milk=

Beat whole egg with 1-2 teaspns. of sugar until creamy; add a few drops
of vanilla and pour over ½ cup boiling milk, stirring.

=Carbonated Egg=

Beat an egg, all together, with salt, add 1-3 tablespns. of cream and
as much carbonated water as desired.

Fruit juices may be used, with or without dairy or nut cream.

The carbonated water may be used with the beaten egg only.

[Illustration: EGG POACHER]




MUSHROOMS


The delightful flavors of mushrooms make them a valuable adjunct to the
vegetarian dietary, whether or not they are classed with meat foods.

No one need to be in ignorance as to the edible ones with the many
reliable books now published in regard to all varieties. But if you
have not studied the subject, consult some one who is a judge before
you use those you have gathered. Or, use only canned ones or those sold
in the markets. Many cases of sickness have come from using mushrooms
partially decayed, rather than from poisonous varieties; so be sure to
reject those not entirely sound.

Mushrooms will not admit of many combinations without losing character.
The simplest ways of preparing them are the best. It is a waste of time
to peel any of the varieties except the puff ball.

Puff ball mushrooms are all edible when gathered at the white stage.

Overcooking toughens mushrooms. 5-20 minutes is sufficient time for
any, except, perhaps, when cooked in a double boiler, then a half hour
may not be too long.

Cream with water develops the flavors better than milk. Butter when
used gives the same result.

When necessary to wash mushrooms, rinse up and down in cold water,
rub the caps quickly, shake and drain in a colander. Often they will
require rubbing only, with a soft flannel. Always cut off a thin slice
from the end of the stalk and throw it away.

When the caps only are to be used in a dish, chop the stems and
imperfect caps and cook for soups and sauces. Mushrooms are not
expensive, as a few fresh or dried ones go a long way for flavoring.
Unless plentiful, do not use mushrooms in timbales or roasts but in
the sauces, where they will count. In the recipes, fresh ones are meant
unless canned ones are mentioned.

[Illustration:

    GRAPE FRUIT
    MUSHROOM GLOBE AND DISH, P. 219
    CREAMED MUSHROOMS]

[Illustration: TRUMESE PIE, P. 167]

=Broiled Mushrooms=

Remove stems, place in fine wire broiler, turn the gills first to the
fire for 5 m., then the other side. Put a small piece of butter in the
center of each mushroom, sprinkle with salt, broil 5 m. Lay carefully
on to pieces of toast or thin toasted wafers or slices of broiled
trumese, skin side up, and serve at once. Melted butter may be poured
over mushrooms on toast instead of putting butter into them while
broiling. Caps are sometimes dipped in salt and olive oil and broiled
after standing in a cold place for an hour. The heat should not be too
intense for broiling.

=Baked Mushrooms=

Cut off part of stems, lay tops down in shallow baking pan, dust with
salt, put a small piece of butter in each mushroom, bake 20 m. in hot
oven. Serve in pan, or on toast with sauce from pan poured over.

=Steamed Mushrooms=

Put mushrooms in saucepan or double boiler with salt and no water.
Cover close, cook 20-30 m. Add hot cream or butter mixed with a little
flour, heat. Serve on toast, cutlets of corn meal porridge, rice
cutlets or slices of broiled trumese. Butter, 2 tablespns. to the pound
of mushrooms, may be added when put to cooking and no milk or cream
used.

=Stewed Mushrooms=

Cut mushrooms into sixths or eighths or slices. Cook in small quantity
of water 10-15 m., add cream, or milk and butter, enough to moisten
toast. Heat, serve on toast.

=★ Creamed Mushrooms=

Stew mushrooms in a larger quantity of water, add cream, and thicken to
the consistency of very heavy cream. Serve in dainty shells of pastry
crust, or on toast or wafers, surrounded with green peas or not.

A small quantity of mushrooms will go a long way in this way.

=Mushroom Stew=

Add cooked fresh or dried mushrooms to thickened consommé. Serve over
rice or macaroni or in rice border.

=Stewed Canned Mushrooms=

Drain mushrooms, if large cut into quarters and put into rich egg or
cream sauce without further cooking.

Canned mushrooms (except home canned) are esteemed more for the feeling
between the teeth than for their flavor and are at their best in pies,
scallops and creams.

=Dried Mushrooms=

Wash dried mushrooms well, soak 4-12 hours in water or milk, simmer
for 5 m. only, in the liquid in which they were soaked. Use in soups,
sauces or stews, in small quantities, as the flavor is very rich.

=Pickled Mushrooms=

Soak mushrooms pickled in salt, for 24 hours, changing the water
several times; drain, and if to be cooked in batter dry between the
folds of a towel. Use cutlets of trumese batter with them, or with
soaked dried mushrooms.

=Puff Balls=

Pare and cut puff ball mushrooms into half-inch slices. Simmer in
butter or olive oil, with or without dipping in egg, and season with
salt. Or, stew and serve as other mushrooms.

=Mushrooms in Rice Rings=

Shape cups of steamed or boiled rice in muffin rings, fill with creamed
mushrooms or Boundary Castle sauce, protose and mushrooms à la crême,
thin, or with mushroom stew.

=Sister McBurnie’s Chop Seuey=

    shredded cabbage
    shredded celery
    chopped onion
    mushrooms in quarters or eighths
    cream, salt
    a little butter if used

Put into close covered vessel in oven, bake 25-35 m. Onion may be
omitted.

=Mushrooms à la Crême=

Use all mushrooms in recipe for celery and mushrooms à la crême p. 115,
or all fresh mushrooms in trumese and mushrooms à la crême p. 165.

=Fresh Mushrooms--Under Glass Globe with Cream=

Cover the bottom of a porcelain dish with toast. On the toast pile
mushrooms, gills down, several rows high, sprinkling with salt. Pour
⅓-½ cup of cream on to the mushrooms, cover with the globe or bell and
simmer on the top of the stove 20-30 m.

The cover is removed after the plate is placed before the guest. This
quantity is served for luncheon when the dish is the principal one of
the meal. For a single course, a smaller portion of toast would be
required and not more than 4 or 5 mushroom caps.

The dishes may be baked in the oven.

=Mushroom Timbales=

    1 cup stewed mushrooms in pieces
    1 tablespn. butter
    1 tablespn. chopped onion
    1 tablespn. chopped parsley
    2 level tablespns. flour
    salt
    ½ cup consommé or milk
    2 yolks of eggs
    1 tablespn. milk

Simmer onion in butter, add parsley, flour, and milk or consommé.
Remove from fire, add yolks of eggs beaten with the tablespn. of milk,
salt and mushrooms. Fill small molds which have been garnished as
desired, bake in pan of water 20 m. or until set. Unmold on to rounds
of toast, surround with thick mushroom sauce.

The timbales may be made of canned mushrooms and served with rich cream
sauce.

=Mushroom and Oyster Plant Pie=

  _Sauce_--

    2½ tablespns. melted butter
    2½-3 tablespns. flour
    1½ cup water (part mushroom liquor if any)
    ½ cup cream
    salt

Mix the flour and butter, pour boiling water over, stirring, add cream
and salt.

Put cooked oyster plant and mushrooms in pieces (⅔ oyster plant, ⅓
mushrooms), 1 pt. in all, into baking dish. Pour sauce over, cover with
universal or pastry crust and proceed as in trumese pie.

Substitute stewed potatoes for oyster plant with either crust, or cover
with a thin crust of mashed lentils, or use celery in place of oyster
plant and cover with a rice crust.

=★ Cream of Fresh Mushroom Soup=

Cook chopped imperfect caps and stems of mushrooms in water 5-10 m.
Add more water if necessary and heavy cream; thicken with flour to the
consistency of heavy cream. Add salt and a few cooked caps if desired,
or, from 1-3 caps may be placed in each dish when the soup is served.

This soup cannot be improved upon.

=★ Boundary Castle Soup=

Add sufficient water with salt to Boundary Castle sauce to make of the
consistency of soup. Very delicious.

Directions for canning and drying mushrooms pp. 71 and 72.




STUFFINGS AND DRESSINGS


The quantity of liquid, if any, must be determined by the purpose the
dressing is to be used for and the dryness of the ingredients. As a
rule, dressings are better without eggs.

Dressings may sometimes be put over the top of suitable meat pies for
the crust.

They may also be put into the bottom of a well oiled tin or pudding
dish with slices of or minced nut meat or mashed legumes on top, baked
and inverted on a platter or chop tray for serving; garnished with
halves of nut meats, accompanied of course with a suitable gravy.

Whole pine nuts, or broken nuts of different kinds may sometimes be
used in stuffings.

=Simple Dressing=

Dip slices of stale bread into salted hot water quickly. Lay them in a
baking tin and sprinkle delicately with powdered leaf sage or savory.
When a sufficient number of layers is prepared, sprinkle with crumbs
and a little more water if necessary. Bake in a quick oven about 20 m.,
or until browned over the top. Serve on a platter with some ragout over
it.

Or, bake in a pudding dish and send to the table to be served with the
meat dish with gravy.

=Savory Dressing=

Crumbs, egg or not, butter or oil, parsley, thyme, sage, summer savory,
onion juice and salt.

=Danish Dressing=

    3 large tart apples, chopped
    1 cup cooked rice
    3 chopped onions
    ½ cup dry bread crumbs
    1 cup English currants
    a very little thyme, sage or savory
    salt
    a little melted butter
    hot water if necessary

=Onion and Parsley Stuffing=

    3 cups stale bread crumbs
    3 onions chopped fine
    2 tablespns. chopped parsley
    2 or 3 tablespns. oil or melted butter

A few sage leaves may be substituted for the parsley for a sage and
onion stuffing.

=Celery Stuffing=

Equal parts bread crumbs and finely-sliced celery, salt and butter.

=Nut and Raisin Dressing=

To bread crumbs, melted butter, thyme, sage, grated onion and salt, add
a few seeded raisins and chopped English walnuts.

=Vegetable Stuffing=

½ cup each mashed green peas, onions in oil, stewed celery, stewed
carrot and finely-sliced raw celery, salt, 1 or 2 eggs.

=Chestnut Stuffing=

Mashed boiled chestnuts, salt, butter or a little heavy cream.

=Black Walnut and Potato Stuffing=

    1 qt. mashed potato
    ½-1 cup chopped black walnut meats
    2-3 tablespns. grated onion
    1¼ teaspn. salt

Beat.




MEAT AND VEGETABLE GRAVIES AND SAUCES

    “Perfection in the art of cookery is attainable only by lengthened
    experience and careful study of the qualities of foods and the
    application of sauces and seasonings. _It is chiefly in knowing how
    to make and apply sauces that a cook shows her skill._”

    --_Old Writer._


Suggestions

Use pastry flour for gravies and sauces.

The sauce should be a little more salt than the food with which it is
to be served.

As a rule, the sauce should be poured around, not over the food.

No positive general rule can be given for thickening, as flour varies
and different kinds of liquid require different proportions. Also the
evaporation of liquids, in different quantities, varies.

About one tablespoon of flour may be calculated for each cup of water;
but for milk, cream or tomato that amount is quite too much.

Do not make sauces too thick. A sauce should not be a paste. The
consistency of medium cream is about right for nearly all; some should
be thinner, and a few slightly thicker.

As they thicken by standing, make sauces thinner at first than required.

A Roux is a mixture of oil or butter, and flour, heated together for
thickening sauces. It is used in the following manner;

Heat the oil, without browning, in a saucepan; add the flour, rub
smooth with wire batter whip, then add liquid, hot, stirring until
smooth. The sauce should come to the boiling point only and be removed
at once from the fire as otherwise the oil will separate.

Adding flour to hot oil cooks it more perfectly than a boiling liquid
and obviates the raw flour taste.

Directions for flavoring, pp. 24-27.

=1 Plain Nut Sauce=

1 tablespn. raw nut butter, 1 pt. water. Mix butter with water, boil ½
hr., add salt with water to make 1½-2 cups; thicken slightly.

Serve with nut and legume dishes, over boiled rice and with some
vegetables. Steamed nut butter may be used instead of raw.

=2 Nut Onion Sauce=

Cook sliced onions with plain sauce.

=3 Nut and Tomato Sauce=

Use ⅓ tomato instead of all water in plain sauce. A little browned
flour sometimes.

=4 Nut Gravy for Roasts=

Cook browned flour, onion, garlic, bayleaf and a very little tomato
with plain sauce. A little sage occasionally.

=5 Nut and Tomato Bisque Sauce=

Thicken nut and tomato bisque, p. 93, slightly.

May use steamed or roasted nut butter, nutmese, or the water from
boiled peanuts with a little lemon juice, for nut sauces.

=6 Simple Brown Sauce=

    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    2 tablespns. flour
    1-2 teaspns. browned flour
    1 pt. water
    salt

Follow directions for making sauce with roux.

=7 Brown Onion Sauce=

Simmer without browning sliced or chopped onion in oil, before adding
flour to brown sauce.

=8 Savory Sauce=

Add a delicate flavoring of leaf sage to brown or brown onion sauce.

=9 Roast Gravy--par excellence=

A little tomato, onion, a trifle of thyme and bay leaf with nut cream
in brown sauce. Simmer, strain.

=10 Consommé Sauce=

Consommé with more browned flour and tomato or onion, thickened. Roux
may be used.

=11 Celery Consommé Sauce=

    ½ cup finely-sliced celery
    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    2 tablespns. flour
    1 pt. consommé

Add celery to hot oil, then flour and hot consommé with more salt if
necessary.

=★ 12 Everybody’s Favorite=

    ⅔ tablespn. butter
    1⅓ tablespn. oil
    ½-1 clove garlic
    1-2 teaspns. browned flour
    1½-2 tablespns. white flour
    1¾ cup boiling water
    ¾ cup milk
    salt
    ½ tablespn. chopped parsley

Throw crushed or finely-chopped garlic into oil and proceed as for
sauce with roux, adding parsley last, of course. The sauce is nice
without the parsley. Raw or steamed nut butter may be used.

=13 Almond and Tomato Cream Sauce--starchless=

    ½ tablespn. almond butter
    1 cup strained tomato
    ½ teaspn. salt

Rub butter smooth with tomato, heat to boiling, add salt and serve.

This sauce heated with stewed okra makes a delightful omelet sauce, or
side dish, or dressing for trumese, toast or rice.

=★ 14 Old Fashioned Milk Gravy=

    1 pt. rich milk (part cream)
    2-2½ tablespns. browned flour No. 1

Blend the flour with cold water or milk, stir into boiling milk, boil
up and add salt. Or, put 1-1½ tablespn. of oil in a sauce pan; when
just hot add the flour, then hot milk, stir until smooth and add salt.

=★ 15 Sour Cream Gravy=

    ½ cup sour cream
    1 tablespn. flour
    ½-1 teaspn. browned flour
    boiling water
    salt

Mix cream and flour, pour boiling water over, stirring constantly, to
make of the desired consistency; boil thoroughly, add salt, serve. The
gravy may be flavored.

=16 Cream or White Sauce=

    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    (or 1 tablespn. solid butter)
    1½ tablespn. flour
    1 pt. milk
    salt

Follow directions for sauce with roux. Or, heat milk, without oil,
in an oiled frying pan, to just boiling; add slowly, stirring, flour
blended with water or milk. Boil up well, remove from fire, add salt.

¼-⅓ cream and ⅔ water may be used instead of milk.

For vegetables the sauce should be thinner. A teaspoonful of sugar
improves the flavor with carrots and turnips.

=★ 17 Tomato Cream Sauce=

Especially suitable for mashed peas or sweet potatoes.

Add ½ cup rich strained tomato and more salt to each pint of cream
sauce.

=18 Cream of Tomato Sauce=

    1 pt. strained tomato
    1 tablespn. flour
    ¼ cup cream (½ cup if thin)
    1 teaspn. salt

Thicken boiling tomato, add cream, remove from fire, add salt.

Do not add the salt before the cream.

=19 Cream of Tomato Sauce--Sister Howard’s=

    1-1½ tablespn. butter
    finely-sliced onion
    1-1½ tablespn. flour
    1 pt. tomato
    2-3 tablespns. cream
    salt

Simmer onion in butter without browning, add flour, hot tomato, cream
and salt.


CREAM SAUCE VARIATIONS

=20 Mint Cream=--Add chopped mint to cream sauce. Use for green peas,
mashed dry green peas, poached or hard boiled eggs and other dishes.

=21 Cream of Celery=--Use water in which celery was cooked, with cream,
or milk and oil or butter, for cream sauce, and add stewed celery.

=22 Cream of Onion=--Add stewed, crushed, boiled onions to cream sauce.
Or, add cooked onions to roux in pan, then add milk. Or, simmer without
browning, chopped raw onions in oil, before adding flour.

=23 Cream of Parsley=--Chopped parsley in cream sauce.

=24 Cream of Spinach=--Pour cream sauce gradually stirring, into
macerated, cooked spinach; heat; strain through wire strainer if
necessary.

=25 Lavender=--Finely-chopped, cooked purple cabbage in cream sauce.

=26 Golden=--Mashed or grated cooked carrots in cream sauce, with or
without onion and garlic.

=27 Brown Cream=--Use 1-1½ (according to brownness) tablespn. browned
flour in cream sauce recipe.

=28 Egg Cream=--Add yolks of 2 eggs to each pint of cream sauce.

=29 Egg Cream No. 2=--1 tablespn. butter, 1 teaspn. flour, 1 cup milk,
2 beaten eggs, salt, 1-2 tablespns. lemon juice if desired, chopped
parsley.

=30 Egg Cream-non-starch=--For stewed cucumbers, oyster plant,
asparagus and carrots. To each pint of vegetables, ½ tablespn. butter,
½ cup thin cream or rich milk, yolk of 1 egg, salt. Richer cream may
be used and butter omitted. Use the yolks of 3 eggs only for a pint of
cream.

=31 Egg=--Add hard boiled eggs in dice or coarsely-chopped, to cream
sauce.

=32 Bread Sauce=

    ⅓ cup fine dry bread crumbs (or ⅔-1 cup stale crumbs)
    1 pt. dairy or nut milk
    salt

Soak crumbs in half the milk in double boiler till soft; beat until
smooth; add salt and the remainder of the milk, heat, strain through
coarse strainer, if necessary. If the milk is not rich a little butter
may be added just before serving. Browned coarse crumbs (fine croutons)
may be sprinkled over the dish with which the sauce is served.

Flavor sauce with onion, onion and sage, chives, celery salt, or onion
and parsley, sometimes.

=33 Bread and Bean Sauce--Sister Elsie’s=

    1 cup mashed beans
    ¼-½ cup bread crumbs (from salt rising bread if you have it)
    1½ cup rich milk
    1 teaspn. flour
    salt
    1 tablespn. butter if desired

Milk from raw nut butter gives another sauce.

=34 Drawn Butter=

    1½-2 tablespns. butter
    1 tablespn. flour
    1 cup boiling water
    salt

Rub butter and flour together, pour boiling water over, heat to
boiling, remove from fire and add salt; or, follow directions for sauce
with roux.


VARIATIONS OF DRAWN BUTTER

=35 Cream=--Use 1¼ cup milk instead of water in preceding recipe.

=36 Tomato=--Use ¼-½ cup of strained tomato, and water to make 1¼ cup,
in drawn butter. Flavor with onion if desired.

=37 Egg=--Chopped or sliced hard boiled eggs in drawn butter.

=38 Sour=--½ to 1 tablespn. lemon juice to each cup of liquid in drawn
butter.

=39 Onion=--Add crushed boiled onions to drawn butter. Use sometimes
1¼-1½ tablespn. browned flour No. 1, instead of white flour. May simmer
(without browning) sliced or chopped raw onion in butter before adding
flour.

=40 Drawn Butter Sauce=

Add ½ cup of cream to plain drawn butter.

=41 Emerald Parsley Sauce=

Add 3-4 tablespns. chopped parsley to drawn butter of 1 pt. of water.
2 or 3 teaspns. lemon juice may be added, also a little mint and sugar
sometimes.

A nice way to prepare the parsley is to wash it well and boil 10 m. in
salted water, drain, chop and bruise to a pulp. Milk with less flour
may be used for the sauce.

=42 Tarragon Sauce=

Substitute finely-chopped fresh tarragon for parsley in preceding
recipe. Use a little lemon juice if desired.

=★ 43 Sauce for Meat and Vegetable Pies=

Rub together 5 tablespns. oil or melted butter and 5 to 6 tablespns. of
flour; add 1 qt. boiling water, boil well, add salt. Or, make as sauce
with roux.

Allow a few slices of onion to stand in sauce for 10 m., then strain
and it is nice for the table for any use.

=44 Gravy for Rhode Island Johnny Cakes=

corn meal porridge, macaroni and rice.

    1 tablespn. oil
    1 teaspn. butter
    1 level teaspn. browned flour
    1 level teaspn. white flour
    ½ cup water
    salt
    a little powdered sage

=45 Cream of Lentil Gravy=

For rice, macaroni or cutlets of corn meal porridge.

    1 cup mashed lentils
    1 cup rich milk or thin cream
    1 teaspn. flour
    salt

Thicken milk with flour blended with water and combine with lentils;
heat. Add finely-sliced celery and chopped parsley for some dishes.

=46 Nut and Lentil Gravy=

    ½ cup lentils (large cupful after cooking)
    ¼-⅓ cup strained tomato
    ¼ tablespn. nut butter
    1 cup water

Mix nut butter with water and add with tomato to mashed lentils. Heat
to boiling, strain through fine strainer, add salt.

=47 Swiss Lentil Gravy=

    1 cup mashed lentils
    1-2 teaspns. browned flour
    slices of onion
    1 teaspn. white flour
    salt

Heat lentils, browned flour and onion together for 10 m. Thicken with
white flour stirred smooth with water. Add salt, strain, reheat.

=48 Vegetable Gravy=

    3 tablespns. chopped onion
    3 tablespns. finely-slice celery
    2 tablespns. grated carrot
    1 clove garlic, crushed
    1 large bay leaf
    5 tablespns. oil
    5 tablespns. white flour
    1-2 teaspns. browned flour
    ½ cup strained tomato
    3½ cups boiling water
    a trifle of thyme
    salt
    1 tablespn. chopped parsley

Simmer vegetables and bay leaf in oil for 10 m. Do not brown. Add brown
and white flour, tomato and water; boil. Remove bay leaf; add salt,
thyme and parsley; serve. Celery tops may be used instead of sliced
stalks. The gravy may be strained.

=49 Olive Sauce=

    2 tablespns. olive oil
    1 tablespn. chopped onion
    1-1½ tablespn. flour
    1 teaspn. browned flour
    1 pt. water, milk, or raw nut butter milk
        (1 tablespn. raw nut butter cooked in water 20 m. to ½ hr.)
    10-15 ripe olives
    1-2 tablespns. lemon juice if desired

Prepare sauce in the usual manner and add sliced or chopped olives just
before serving.

=50 Olive and Nut Butter Sauce=

For Rhode Island Johnny cakes, corn meal porridge, macaroni and
potatoes.

Make thin cream of roasted nut butter, boil up, add chopped or sliced
ripe olives and salt if necessary. A little tomato may be used.

For a cold sauce, stir nut butter smooth with tomato or water and add
chopped olives.

=51 Cream of Fresh Mushroom Sauce=

Cook chopped stems and imperfect mushrooms in salted water for 10 m.
Add water. Thicken a little more than for an ordinary sauce. Add a
little heavy cream, heat.

Mushrooms may be cooked for 20 m. in milk and butter in a double boiler
or on back of range.

=52 Mushroom and Asparagus Sauce=

Use asparagus liquor for part of the liquid in the preceding recipe and
add a few cooked asparagus tips.

=53 Boundary Castle (Fresh Mushroom) Sauce=

For timbales, mashed lentils, macaroni, rice, potatoes or toast,
broiled trumese, croquettes, patties and corn meal porridge.

    2 tablespns. oil
    3 tablespns. chopped onion
    ½ tablespn. browned flour
    2½ tablespns. white flour
    2 tablespns. tomato
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt
    ¾-1 cup chopped mushrooms
    1 tablespn. chopped parsley

Simmer but do not brown onion in oil for 10 m., add browned and white
flour mixed, then tomato, with water for thick sauce. Now add with
their liquor, the mushrooms which have been cooked for 10 m. and water
to make of the right consistency, with the salt and parsley.

When served with timbales decorated with truffles, use juice of
truffles in sauce.

=54 Italian (Dried Mushroom) Sauce=

    2 tablespns. butter and oil
    2 tablespns. chopped onion
    1 clove of garlic, crushed
    1½-2 tablespns. flour
    mushroom liquor with hot rich milk to make 1 pt.
    ¼ cup dried mushrooms
    salt

Heat oil, add onion and garlic, simmer, add flour, then liquid, and
lastly the mushrooms which have been soaked for 2 hours, chopped, and
cooked for 5 m. in the water in which they were soaked. Serve sometimes
over split biscuit, on a platter, with slices of broiled trumese on
top, sprinkled with chopped parsley.

For variety, add 1 teaspn. browned flour and 2 tablespns. tomato to the
sauce.

For Italian Tomato Sauce, use ½ cup tomato instead of the mushrooms.

=55 Canned Mushroom Sauce=

    2 tablespns. oil or butter
    2 tablespns. onion, chopped
    1 clove garlic, crushed
    1½-2 tablespns. flour
    2 teaspns. browned flour
    ¼ cup tomato
    a trifle of thyme
    a very little sage
    ½ cup sliced, canned mushrooms
    1 pt. liquid--water and mushroom liquor
    salt

Proceed as in other similar recipes.

=★ 56 Dried Mushroom Brown Sauce=

    3 level tablespns. butter
    2 level tablespns. flour
    2 level teaspns. browned flour
    ½ cup strong dried mushroom liquor
    1½ cup milk
    salt

May add a few chopped dried mushrooms cooked 5 m. after soaking 4-5
hours. A little lemon juice may be added if liked.

=★ 57 Sauce Imperial=

    1 qt. stewed tomatoes
    1 or 2 large bay leaves
    2 large sprigs thyme (or ¼ teaspn. dry thyme)
    1 tablespn. chopped onion
    ⅛ of a lemon, rind and all
    2 tablespns. oil
    2½ or 3 tablespns. flour
    salt

Cook all except flour, oil and parsley together for 20 m. Strain, heat
oil, add flour and the strained tomato mixture. Then add 1¼ to 1½
teaspn. salt (or enough to destroy the acid taste of the tomato), and
the parsley.

=★ 58 Chili Sauce=

    4 qts. stewed tomatoes
    2-3 pints finely-sliced onion
    1 cup sugar
    1¼ cup lemon juice
    1¾-2¼ tablespns. salt
    1½-2 tablespns. celery salt
    4 large bay leaves
    ¼-½ teaspn. thyme

Cook tomato, onion and bay leaf together until onions are tender; then
add dry ingredients (which have been mixed together), and the lemon
juice. Boil up well, put into jars and seal. Thyme and bay leaf may
omitted.

=★ 59 Tomato Catsup=

    2 qts. strained, stewed tomato
    1 large head of celery
    4 tablespns. sugar
    4 teaspns. salt.

Slice celery very fine, add with sugar and salt to the boiling
tomatoes; cook until the celery is tender and the sauce rather thick.

=60 Other Catsups=

Very delightful sauces may be made by cooking a consommé, the nut
French soup and other suitable soups down thick.

=61 Peas and Carrot Sauce=

Add cooked carrots cut into dice or fancy shapes, and cooked green
peas, to thickened white soup stock, p. 77. They may be added to cream
sauce or drawn butter.

=62 Pink Sauce=

Fruit color, or rich red beet juice in drawn butter or white sauce.
Sauce may be flavored with onion, garlic and lemon juice or with celery.

=63 Apple and Onion Sauce=

Simmer chopped onion in oil 5-10 m. Add thick slices of apple with salt
and a very little water. Cover close; cook until apples are tender.
Serve with broiled trumese or nutmese, or with omelets or scrambled
eggs.

=64 Another=

Apples in quarters, not pared, grated onion, a little tomato, sugar,
salt and celery salt, water to cook apples tender. Rub through
colander.

=65 Currant Sauce=

    1 qt. currants
    1 large onion, sliced
    1 teaspn. celery salt
    ½ teaspn. salt
    2-3 tablespns. sugar
    ½ cup water

Cook onion in water, with salt and sugar. When tender, add currants and
celery salt; cook until currants are broken but not till the seeds are
hard. Put into jars boiling hot. Seal.

=66 Currant Sauce No. 2=

    1 qt. currants
    1 small head celery--1 pt. finely sliced
    3 or 4 tablespns. sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 cup water

Simmer all together until currants are broken. Seal in jars. Or, cook
celery in salted water, add currants and sugar, and cook until currants
are broken only.

=67 Baked Gooseberry Sauce=

    1 pt. ripe gooseberries
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ cup water
    a little salt

Put all into baking dish, cover close, bake about an hour.

=68 Jellied Chutney Sauce=

    1 pt. currant juice
    1 pt. red raspberry juice
    1 cup orange juice
    3½ cups granulated sugar
    1-1½ cup ground seeded raisins
    particles of thin yellow shavings of half an orange

Make jelly and add a little at a time to raisins. Stir in orange rind
and put into tumblers. Rind may be omitted.

=69 Tomato Chutney=

    1 qt. sliced tomatoes
    1 qt. sliced onions
    ¾ cup lemon juice
    1 cup water
    1 cup chopped raisins
    salt

Cook all together 1½, hour.

=70 Ripe Cucumber Chutney=

    1 qt. pared and seeded ripe cucumber in cubes
    ⅓ cup lemon juice
    ¾ cup sugar
    ⅔ teaspn. ground coriander seed
    ⅛-¼ teaspn. celery salt
    ½ cup seeded raisins

Soak cucumber in cold water over night, drain; cook with the sugar,
raisins and part of the lemon juice until soft; add the other
ingredients, heat well and seal in jars.

=71 Apple and Green Tomato Chutney=

    2 qts. chopped tart apples
    3 cups (1 lb.) seeded raisins
    3-4 cups brown sugar
    3-4 cups lemon juice
    1-2 cups water
    2 qts. chopped green tomatoes
    1 large onion chopped
    ⅓-½ cup salt

Grind tomatoes through food chopper, drain, pour cold water over and
drain after 1 hr., mix all ingredients, let stand in stone jar over
night.

In the morning set jar in kettle of cold water with something
underneath to keep it from the bottom of the kettle; heat to boiling,
cook 6 hrs., stirring occasionally. Seal in jars. May cook carefully in
preserving kettle on pad or ring.

=72 Brother Coates’ Mother’s Chutney=

    ¾ pt. lemon juice
    ¼ pt. water
    ¾ cup brown sugar
    3-6 cloves of garlic
    3 level tablespns. salt
    ½ cup chopped onion and
    ¼ cup shallots or ¾ cup onion
    1 pt. gooseberries (¾ pt. canned)
    ¾-1 pt. quartered apples--½ as many dried apples
    ¾ cup raisins

Chop fruit fine, boil in ½ the lemon juice and water with the sugar.
Chop onions, shallots and garlic fine, mix with salt and remaining
lemon juice and water and add to boiling fruit. Cook well together and
put into jars.

=73 Mint Sauce=

    1 tablespn. chopped spearmint
    1 tablespn. brown sugar
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    2 tablespns. boiling water

Pour boiling water over mint, add lemon juice and sugar and stir until
sugar is dissolved. Do not heat sauce. Proportions of mint, sugar and
lemon juice may be varied and water may be omitted.

=74 Currant Mint Sauce=

Add chopped mint to melted currant jelly. The addition of particles of
thin yellow rind of orange makes a variation.

=75 Sauce Amèricaine=

Suitable for Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, breaded carrots or bean
croquettes.

    2 tablespns. oil or oil and butter
    yolks of 2 eggs
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    ¼-⅓ cup of hot water

Cook in double boiler like custard, adding only a part of the water at
first.

A little less water may be used.

For variety add chopped or sliced olives, or onion juice and parsley,
or olives and onion.

=76 Sauce for Breaded Carrots=

Cream the yolk of a hard boiled egg with a tablespn. of butter; place
on back of range and add ½-1 tablespn. of lemon juice with water to
make 2 tablespns., and salt. As soon as the mixture thickens, pour it
over the carrots.

=77 Sour Sauce for Carrot Timbale=

    1 tablespn. butter
    yolks of 3 eggs
    2 tablespns. cream
    1 cup boiling water
    1½ tablespn. lemon juice
    ¼-½ teaspn. salt

Mix creamed butter and beaten yolks of eggs with cream; pour boiling
water over; cook in double boiler until thick. Remove from fire, add
lemon juice and salt. Serve at once. Excellent without lemon juice.

=78 Lemon Butter Sauce=

Cream butter and work into it lemon juice to taste. Add chopped
parsley, 1 tablespn. to each half cup of butter.

A few chopped nuts may also be added.

=79 Pickle for Beets, String Beans and Carrots=

2 parts lemon juice, 1 part water, 1-1¼ part sugar, a trifle of salt or
none; heat to boiling, pour over vegetables, drain off. Repeat twice.

With string beans a little celery salt or finely-sliced celery may be
used.




VEGETABLES


“Upon leaving Eden to gain his livelihood by tilling the earth under
the curse of sin, man received permission to eat also ‘the herb of the
field.’”

While vegetables are not, as some suppose, the chief article of a
vegetarian diet, they form an important part of it, supplying the bulk
so necessary to good digestion, as well as the mineral elements. One
writer says, “Nearly all vegetables are blood purifiers; they dissolve
other food and greatly assist digestion.”


Suggestions

Vegetables should be used soon after gathering, as they begin to
ferment and lose their wholesomeness as well as flavors very shortly.

As a rule put vegetables to cooking in boiling water, and bring to the
boiling point again as quickly as possible.

Cook green vegetables in salted water to preserve their shape and
color. A lump of white sugar in the saucepan is said to preserve the
color also, or a few drops of lemon juice, or charcoal tied in muslin.

Onions and cabbage should be cooked in salted water.

Cook roots and tubers in unsalted, and if possible soft water until
tender or nearly so; then add the salt and let them boil up well.

If roots have become withered soak them in water as nearly ice cold as
possible, for three or four hours or over night, before cooking.

Soak cauliflower and loose heads of cabbage in cold (not salted) water
for an hour or more. Drain and shake gently to dislodge insects, if any.

Pare all vegetables except turnips, as thin as possible.

Turnips should be pared inside the dark line encircling them, or they
will have a strong taste.

Parboiling leeks, onions, cabbage and old carrots renders them more
digestible and more agreeable to some.

All vegetables will require longer cooking at great altitude.

Milk or cream of raw or steamed (not roasted) nut butter may be
substituted for dairy milk or cream with nearly all vegetables.

Many vegetables are delightful to the cultivated taste served plain
with Brazil or other nuts. Thus we get the benefit of the fine delicate
flavors in the different foods instead of covering them up with sauces
and dressings.

More elaborate dishes of vegetables are given among entrées.

=Artichokes--Globe=

Soak artichokes for several hours or over night, drain, cut stalks
close, trim away the bottom leaves, clip the sharp points from the
leaves or cut off the tops straight across. Boil in salted water, if
possible with charcoal tied in piece of muslin, until tender enough for
the leaves to draw out easily, ¾-1 hour. Remove from water carefully
with flat wire beater or small skimmer. Drain upside down; serve whole
or in halves or quarters, with cream or egg cream sauce, drawn butter
or sauce Amèricaine poured around; or on a napkin on hot platter or
chop tray and pass sauce with them. Serve cold with French dressing.

It is a good plan to tie a strip of muslin around each artichoke before
boiling to hold it in shape, and to put an inverted plate upon them
while cooking to keep them down.

=Artichokes--Jerusalem=

Wash and boil artichokes with the skins on until tender, 30-40 m. If
they boil too long they may become tough. Drain, peel, and serve in
rich cream sauce. They may be peeled before boiling.

A still better way is to peel artichokes cut them into thick slices
and boil 15-20 m., then drain thoroughly and serve in cream, cream of
tomato or onion cream sauce.

Not containing any starch, Jerusalem artichokes are suitable for
salads, either cooked in slices and dried on a towel after draining, or
used raw in thin slices.

=Asparagus=

Select green asparagus for the table, the short bleached stalks are
tough and often bitter. Take care also that asparagus is fresh. The
tops of stale asparagus have the odor of spoiled flesh meat and are not
fit to use.

If not just from the garden, asparagus should stand in cold water ½-1
hour before cooking. Wash thoroughly, dipping the heads up and down in
a large quantity of water, shaking well to dislodge the sand.

As the different parts of the stalk vary in tenderness, the best way
to prepare and cook asparagus is to lay a handful of stalks on a
vegetable board and holding it with the left hand, with a large sharp
knife cut off the tips about 1½ in. from the end, and if the next part
is very tender, cut off 1 in. more to go with the tips. Then cut inch
lengths of the next that is of about equal tenderness, and lastly, the
remaining part of the stalk that is not tough. The tough part save to
flavor soups or sauces, or, reject entirely.

To cook, throw the third lot, that nearest the tough part, into boiling
salted water, boil for 10 m., add the second lot, boil 10 m., throw in
the top part and boil 10-15 m., or until tips are just tender. By this
method the asparagus is all nice and tender and the tips are whole.

When desiring to serve in longer pieces, lay on the board as before and
cut 4 or 5 in. from the top (reserving the remaining part for soups or
scallops). Tie into neat bundles with strips of muslin. Stand these
bundles in rapidly boiling, salted water with the heads well out. Cook
from 20 to 30 m., when the stalks will be tender and not decapitated.

Asparagus is one of the vegetables that will not admit of many
combinations; such only as develop and preserve its characteristic
flavor are suitable.

=Asparagus--Cream or Butter=

Cook in short pieces as directed; drain or leave the water on (there
should be but little); add without stirring a little heavy cream; bring
just to the boiling point, remove from the fire, add more salt if
necessary, shaking gently to dissolve it, and serve in vegetable dish
with or without points of toast around the edge.

Butter may be substituted for cream.

=Asparagus--Egg Cream Sauce=

Lay cooked asparagus in small pieces on hot moistened toast of any
desired shape, on tray or platter, and pour egg cream sauce, around.
It may also be served the same with a nice rich cream sauce, or with
either sauce in pastry crusts for Asparagus en Croustade.

=Asparagus--Drawn Butter=

On large, slightly moistened toast points on a platter, pile long
pieces of asparagus cooked according to directions (enough for one
serving on each piece of toast), the heads all one way, and put a
generous spoonful of drawn butter on each. Or the sauce may be put on
when serving.

=Asparagus--Sauce Amèricaine and Spinach Leaves=

Lay asparagus on hot platter with heads toward each end and stem ends
just meeting in center; surround with border of salad leaves of spinach
and place same across the asparagus where the stems meet. Serve leaves
with asparagus, and pass sauce Amèricaine.

=String Beans--Cream, Nut or Dairy=

String beans should be gathered before the pods begin to show the shape
of the bean much.

To prepare, break the blossom end back and pull off the string from
that side, then break the stem the other way and remove the string from
that side. Wash beans well and if they have not been crisped before
stringing, let them lie in cold (ice, if possible) water a half hour
or longer. Drain, take in handfuls on to the vegetable board and cut
into ¾ in. lengths (cut diagonally instead of straight across when
preferred). Throw into boiling salted water and boil until tender,
1-3 hours. Drain, saving the water for soups or to make drawn butter
sometimes for the beans. Cover with cream, heat, remove from fire, add
salt, serve.

Cream from raw nut butter may be added to the beans about ½ hour before
they are done instead of using dairy cream.

Cream sauce of either nut or dairy milk may be served over beans on
toast if desired.

Wax and stringless beans are prepared and cooked the same except that
_young_ stringless beans have no strings. Any of the varieties may be
cooked in whole pods when desired but will require a longer time for
cooking. Flowering or scarlet runner beans are used for string beans
when the pods are very young.

=String Beans--Nut and Tomato Bisque Sauce=

Prepare beans as above and cover with sauce 5, made of either raw or
roasted nut butter.

=Shelled Green Beans=

Wash beans before shelling and not after, cook in boiling salted water
until tender, the time varying according to the variety. Allow plenty
of time as beans are richer in flavor if simmered or kept hot for some
time after they are tender.

They may be served with different sauces, but it seems too bad to spoil
their delightful flavors with anything but salt, or a little cream or
butter, nut or dairy.

=Flowering Beans--Green=

The large pole beans with red and white blossoms have the richest
flavor of all shelled beans. After shelling, put beans into cold water,
let them heat slowly to the boiling point and boil 5-10 m. Drain, let
cold water run over them in the colander. Return to the fire with
boiling salted water and cook until tender, considerably longer than
other shelled beans. Serve plain, or with a little cream poured over
and shaken (not stirred) into them a few minutes before removing from
the fire. If one has the time to hull these and Lima beans, it may be
done.

_To Hull_--Boil beans about half an hour (or until the skins are
loosened) in unsalted water. Drain and slip the hulls off with the
thumb and finger.

Cook after hulling in double boiler or very gently on back of stove,
adding seasoning before they are quite tender which will be in a much
shorter time than with the hulls on.

=Beets=

Beets should be fresh, plump and firm. If slightly withered, they may
be freshened by standing in cold water over night. But if much withered
do not waste time and fuel in trying to cook them, as they will be
bitter and tough with any amount of cooking. Use care in handling beets
before cooking so as not to break the skins. If the skins are broken
the flavor and sweetness of the beet will be lost in the water. Press
with thumb and finger to find when they are tender rather than to
puncture with a knife or fork.

Put to cooking in perfectly boiling water. Boil steadily until tender,
when remove at once from the fire as over-cooking toughens them, throw
into cold water a moment and rub off the skins. Serve plain, whole if
small, or cut into quarters if large; or, slice and pour over a hot
mixture of lemon juice and sugar (part water and a trifle of salt may
be used), or hot cream with salt, or salt and olive oil.

Small young beets, right from the garden, will cook in from 20 m. to 1
hr. Large, old ones in winter will require 3-5 hours.

=Pickled Beets=

Let sliced beets stand over night in sauce 79.

=Broccoli=

This is a vegetable grown in cool climates, similar to cauliflower,
more hardy but not so fine in quality. Follow directions for cooking
and serving cauliflower, except that broccoli requires about 20 m. only
for cooking.

=Brussels Sprouts=

Wash, pick off outside leaves, lay in cold water ½-1 hour, drain. Boil
in salted water (in cheese cloth if convenient), 15-30 m., according to
age; do not cook until soft. Drain carefully, pile in center of dish;
serve with hot cream poured over, or with sauce 16, 19, 34, 57, olive
oil or French dressing. May add 1 tablespoon of lemon juice to each ½
cup of 34.

=Cabbage--Plain Boiled=

Trim cabbage and if not very crisp let stand in cold or ice water 1 hr.
or over night. Drain, cut into sixths, eighths or any number of pieces
1-1½ in. across the broadest part. Lay in sufficient boiling salted
water to cover; let come to the boiling point and set back on the
stove where it will simmer gently ½-¾ of an hour, until tender only,
and still perfectly white. Drain and lay on to hot dish with pieces
overlapping. Serve at once.

Until one has tried it, he will not know how delightfully sweet this
cabbage is, perfectly plain, eaten slowly with Brazil nuts, filberts,
almonds or English walnuts. It may be served with olive oil or lemon
juice, or with both together or with sauce 16, 34 or 57, or with the
sour cream or sour milk salad dressing without cooling. Use two eggs in
dressing when serving warm.

If cooked until it begins to turn dark, cabbage will have a strong
flavor and will be indigestible.

_To Parboil_--Put at first into a large quantity of unsalted boiling
water, cook 15 m., drain carefully, sprinkle with salt, pour boiling
water over and proceed as above.

=My Mother’s Cabbage, or Cabbage in Cream=

Shave crisp cabbage fine, cook in boiling salted water 20-30 m., until
just tender and still white. Drain, pour in cream, heat to almost
boiling, serve.

_For Sour Cabbage_--Add a little lemon juice instead of or with cream
and more salt if necessary.

=★ Cabbage in Tomato=

Prepare cabbage as in preceding recipe, cook for 20 m., drain, add
stewed tomatoes (not too juicy, they may be strained if preferred)
with salt and cook until cabbage is tender. This is an unusually fine
combination and very suitable to accompany a hearty nut meat dish such
as broiled trumese. A little cream may be added just before serving,
but the dish is complete without it.

=Cabbage and Corn=

Heat together 2 parts of stewed cabbage and 1 part of corn with cream,
nut or dairy.

=Sweet Sour Cabbage=

    1 qt. fine shaved cabbage
    ¾ cup water
    2 tablespns. oil or butter
    1 level teaspn. salt
    ¼ cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. caraway seeds
    ¼ cup lemon juice

Cook cabbage in water 15-20 m., then add the other ingredients and
simmer slowly until the cabbage is tender.

=Cabbage with Nuts and Raisins=

Season stewed cabbage with cream--cocoanut, almond or dairy, or with
butter; add stewed raisins and sprinkle chopped nuts over just before
serving. May garnish with halves of nuts.

=Carrots=

Carrots being among the most healthful vegetables should be used
freely, and with a little care they may be made exceedingly palatable.

Unless very fresh, let carrots stand in cold water for some time before
paring. When they are full grown, or late in the season, parboil them
to remove the strong taste.

It will require from 20 m. to 1½ hr. to cook carrots tender, according
to the age and the sizes into which they are cut. A little chopped
parsley makes a pretty combination with most of the dishes.

=Carrots--Minced=

Scrape or pare carrots, cut into strips, grind in food cutter coarse or
fine as preferred, cook in water until tender, add salt, boil, drain.
Add a little cream, cream sauce, butter or oil, reheat, serve. Add
a trifle of sugar to cream sauce or cream. Carrots may be ground or
rubbed through colander after boiling.

=Carrots--Stewed=

Cut pared carrots into quarters, sixths or eighths, lengthwise, then
across in quarter inch slices in the largest part and gradually thicker
toward the small end; or if carrots are small and of uniform size they
may be cut in whole round slices. Cook until tender, drain, and reheat
with cream, or sauce 16 or 28, to each pint of which a teaspoonful of
sugar has been added, or add butter and lemon juice, sauce 1, 2 or 34.

=Carrots à la Washington=

    1 qt. sliced or diced carrots
    1 cup to 1 pint sliced onions
    ¼ cup strained tomato
    ½ tablespn. browned flour
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt
    1 tablespn. raw nut butter if desired

Cook all together in a small quantity of water until carrots are tender
and well dried out.

=Pickled Carrots=

Pour sauce 79, over sliced cooked carrots, cover and let stand for
several hours.

=Carrots and Peas--Better than either alone=

Mix 1 part stewed carrots and 2 parts cooked green peas. Add cream or
cream sauce, heat and serve.

Or, the carrots may be cooked in slices, laid overlapping around edge
of flat dish, with peas piled in center and sauce poured around.

=Carrots and String Beans--Excellent=

Equal quantities cooked string beans and carrots with cream or cream
sauce. If preferred, the beans may be cooked whole and the carrots cut
into strips.

=Carrots and Onions=

Pour hot cream over a mixture of stewed onions and carrots; heat and
serve.

=Carrots and Beets=

Heat mixture for pickled carrots, add 1 part carrots and 2 parts beets;
serve as soon as hot. Butter, lemon juice and salt may be used instead
of the dressing.

=Carrots and Corn--Delightful=

To equal quantities of stewed carrots and corn add cream or thin rich
cream sauce; heat, serve. If the corn is dried corn, especially dried
yellow sweet corn, the dish is most delightful.

=Carrots and Succotash=

1 part each carrots and beans with 2 parts corn; season with cream or
with milk and butter.

=Cauliflower=

While cauliflower is a delightfully delicate vegetable when properly
cooked, it is easily rendered strong and disagreeable. It should be
cooked until tender only, 15-25 m. in constantly boiling liquid,
either slightly salted water, or milk and water (⅓ milk), salted. Tie
loosely in cheese cloth or muslin to prevent any particles of scum
from settling on it and to keep the flowerets whole, then drop into a
sufficient quantity of rapidly boiling liquid to cover it.

It should not lose its snowy whiteness in cooking. 5 m. of over-cooking
will ruin it. The milk helps to keep it white and gives it a richer
flavor.

To serve whole, trim off the outside leaves, leaving the inside green
leaves on, and cut the stalk close. When done, lay carefully in a round
dish and pour sauce over or around it. If the head is a perfect one, do
not cover its beauty with sauce.

Sauce 16, 18 or 75 or 34 plain or with lemon juice, are all suitable
for the heads, and when broken into flowerets it is delightful with hot
rich cream poured over it. Salt and oil, with or without lemon juice
may also be used.

Nice perfect flowerets with Sauce Amèricaine or any suitable sauce may
be used as a garnish for timbales and other true meat dishes.

For salad, let cooked cauliflower stand in cold water until ready to
serve.

=Celery--Raw=

Trim off the coarse outside stalks, leaving about an inch of the root
stalk; then cut the whole stalk into quarters or sixths from the bottom
up, and throw into ice water until well crisped. If there should be
dirt between the stalks it will be necessary to cut them off and brush
each one separately with a vegetable brush. Throw the tender inside
stalks into water to be served raw, and reserve the outside ones for
cooking.

It is said that wilted celery may be restored to crispness by dipping
into hot water or laying a few minutes in warm water, then plunging
into ice water.

=Celery--Mint Sauce=

Cut tender stalks of celery across as fine as possible, cover with
cold fresh mint sauce and serve in dainty cups with suitable true meat
dishes.

=Celery--Stewed=

Cut tender stalks of celery (not those that are fit for flavoring only)
into half-inch lengths, by handfuls on board with large knife. Put into
boiling salted water and boil 30-35 m., or until just tender. Drain
(there should not be much water left), pour cream or sauce over, let
stand over hot water 10-20 m. Serve by itself or on toast. Sauce 16,
plain, with a few drops of lemon juice in it, or made with half water
in which the celery was cooked, or 34, 57 or 31 (when using 31, of
course it should not stand over hot water) are all enjoyable with it.

=★ Celery in Tomato=

Stew celery as above in just enough water to cook, for 25 m. and have
very little water, if any, remaining; then add enough strained or
unstrained stewed tomato to nearly cover, and simmer until celery is
tender and tomato cooked away a little. The combination of the flavors
of celery and tomato is unusually fine. The addition just before
serving of a little heavy cream makes the dish still more delicious.

=Chard--Swiss=

Swiss Chard or Spinach Beet, affords two distinct dishes from the same
plant at one time. Strip the leafy part of the foliage from the stalk
and cook as greens. Cook and serve the stalks the same as asparagus.
The leaves and stalks may be cooked together as greens.

Young shoots of poke or scoke are sometimes served as “French Chard.”

=Corn--Green=

The earliest varieties of green corn are never very sweet. By far the
richest and sweetest are the yellow kinds, though the dark purple or
black almost equals them. There are also some medium or later varieties
of white corn that are excellent.

Corn is at its best the day it is gathered. When not perfectly fresh,
cook corn in almost any other way than on the cob. Never cook it in
salted water as salt hardens it. Corn requires the least salt for
seasoning of any vegetable.

=Corn--On the Cob=

Husk nice fresh corn and put it over the fire in cold water. When just
at the boiling point, but not boiling, remove from the fire. Let it
stand in the hot water where it will not boil until ready to serve.

Serve in a dish on a napkin covered with another napkin, or in a close
covered dish, as a few moments’ exposure to the air toughens it. In
eating, score each row with one tine of the fork so that the hulls will
be left on the cob, unless you have a corn slitter.

=Corn--Boiled=

Put husked corn into boiling water and boil rapidly for 5-15 m.,
usually about 10 m., as that which requires 12-15 m. cooking is really
too old to cook on the cob. Young, tender corn will cook in 5 m. Long
boiling destroys the sweetness of corn and renders it tough.

=Corn--Steamed=

Wrap ears of corn in cheese cloth and steam for 15-20 m.

[Illustration: CORN SLITTER--FOR INDIVIDUAL USE AT TABLE]

Hold the ear of corn with one hand and draw the slitter with slight
pressure. Three or four strokes will slit every grain on the cob. It
does not remove the corn from the cob but cuts the hull of every grain.
The delicious corn is obtained with the slightest pressure of the
teeth, leaving the hulls on the cob.

_To Prepare Corn for Muffins, Oysters, etc._--Slit the grains as
described above, then, holding the slitter in the same position but
elevating the hand use the front of the slitter as a scoop and push the
corn into a dish.

=Corn--Baked, Boiled or Steamed in Husks=

Select nice tender ears of uniform size. Open the husks and remove the
silk, then tie the husks close in place. A few of the heavy outside
husks should be removed. Bake the ears in a _hot_ oven, separate from
each other, 15-20 m., remove the husks quickly and serve covered.

Or prepare in the same way and after tying, cut off the stalk and point
of the ear and boil rapidly for 10-12 m. or steam for 10-20 m. Serve in
the husks on napkin. The husks give a sweet flavor to the corn and help
to keep it warm when they are not removed before serving.

=Corn--Roasted--Best of All=

Place husked corn in wire broiler or large corn popper and hold close
to bed of hot coals, or lay on gridiron over the coals, turning
the ears as necessary. The ears may be laid on the coals when more
convenient and turned often, or they may be roasted in a _very hot_
oven.

=Corn--Stewed=

If corn is quite old, grate the outside of each ear on a coarse
grater and scrape out the remaining pulp with the back of a knife.
Cook carefully in oiled saucepan on ring or asbestos pad, in a small
quantity of water 8-12 m.; add sugar, to give the sweetness of young
corn, salt and a little cream, cream sauce or butter. Heat, serve.

When corn is not too old, the nicest way to prepare it is to draw a
knife down each row of kernels, then with a large sharp knife cut a
thin shaving from each two rows and scrape the pulp from the cob with
the back of a knife. Cook the part cut off in boiling water for 5 m.,
then add the pulp and cook carefully 5-8 m. longer. Season as for
grated corn, omitting the sugar if corn is sweet.

=In Milk=--Cook either way in milk in double boiler 20-30 m., and
season as desired.

=Corn--Baked=

Prepare corn in either of the ways given for stewed corn; add salt,
sugar if necessary, and enough rich milk to cover. Bake in hot oven
15-20 m.

=Corn--Dried=

Cover dried corn ½ in. (or more) deep with warm water, let stand over
night. In the morning set in warm place and shortly before serving time
increase the heat gradually until it is about at the boiling point, but
not boiling. Season with a little cream, milk or butter, or with cream
of raw or steamed nut butter and salt; heat, serve.

Or, cover with warm water 1½-2 hours before meal time and keep hot
(covered) on the back of the stove. Just before serving, season and
heat just to boiling.

Or, best of all, cover quite deep with cold milk, let stand in cold
place over night, cook in double boiler 1 hr. or longer, season, serve.

=Cucumbers=

The fruit of the cucumber vine “serves to introduce a large quantity
of water into the system and is a refreshing addition to richer
foods, especially in hot weather, when its crisp, cool succulence is
peculiarly acceptable.”--_Church._

One unusually successful physician used to recommend cucumbers because
they were “so crisp and easily digested.”

Cucumbers should be gathered in the early morning, laid in ice water
for an hour or two, then kept in the ice box or on the cellar bottom
until serving time. Or, when they come from the market, they should be
put at once into ice water and kept in it until thoroughly refreshed.
Cucumbers are nearly always left on the vines until they are too old.
Many never know the delightful flavor of cucumbers in which the seeds
are just formed but not developed.

=Cucumbers au Naturel=

Pare nice crisp cucumbers, cut in quarters lengthwise and serve on a
flat dish, to be eaten with or without salt the same as celery. This is
by far the most enjoyable way to serve cucumbers.

=Sliced Cucumbers=

Pare and slice cucumbers in not too thin slices. Pass lemon juice, salt
and oil with them. Some prefer them with salt and oil only; others with
lemon juice and salt.

If not thoroughly crisp, or if prepared some time before serving, lay
in ice water without salt. Salt wilts and toughens them.

=Stewed Cucumbers=

Pare cucumbers, cut into halves lengthwise, crosswise also if long. If
seeds are large, remove them, but younger fruit is better.

Lay the pieces cut side down in perfectly boiling unsalted water. When
nearly tender 15-20 m., add a little salt to the water and finish
cooking. They should be just tender, not soft when done. They will take
about 20-25 m. cooking in all, never over 30 m. Drain thoroughly. Serve
with sauce 75, 34, 28 or 29 or with 16 made of cocoanut or dairy milk.
On toast, with egg cream sauce like asparagus, they are especially
nice. Sprinkle chopped parsley in the sauce.

=Egg Plant=

Egg plant belongs to the family of the deadly night-shade, the same as
the potato, tomato, peppers and tobacco, and contains an irritating
principle which should be removed by thorough parboiling when used.

=Egg Plant in Batter=

Cut egg-plant into ½-¾ in. slices, put into a large quantity of cold
water, heat to boiling and boil 5 m.; drain, repeat the process, add
salt to the third water and boil until just tender; drain thoroughly.

Drop spoonfuls of the following batter on well oiled griddle or
dripping pan, lay on slices of the egg plant and cover with the batter.
Brown delicately on both sides on the griddle or bake in a quick oven
to a delicate brown. Serve at once.

  _Batter_--

    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    3 tablespns. flour
    1½ cup boiling water
    2 eggs
    ⅓ teaspn. salt
    5 tablespns. stale graham bread crumbs,
        or enough to make a batter of the right consistency

Heat oil (without browning), add flour, stir smooth, add water,
stirring; when smooth, remove from fire, add beaten eggs, salt and
crumbs.

=Greens=

One of the many advantages that the country dweller has over those
who live in the city is the great variety of “greens,” as we call the
edible weeds, nearly all of which are superior in flavor to the much
prized spinach.

There is _narrow or sour dock_, easily distinguished from the
broad-leaved (which is not edible) by its long, slender leaf curled on
the edges; the _dandelion_, which should be gathered before the buds
appear or at least when they are just peeping out, as the greens are
bitter when the buds are well developed; _milkweed_, of which we use
only the tips unless the stalks are small and tender: _pigweed_, _red
root_, _lamb’s quarters_, _purslane_ or “pusley,” with _poke shoots_,
the garden _turnip tops_, _cabbage sprouts_, young _beet tops_ and
_endive_.

Some are better in combinations, such as milkweed and narrow dock,
narrow dock and pigweed, milkweed and purslane and purslane and beet
tops.

Do not try to wash greens in a small quantity of water. Put them when
first gathered into a large vessel, a wash boiler, a tub or a deep sink
in which the water will be deep enough to “swash” them up and down with
the hands. When they are thoroughly revived _lift_ them from the water
(do not drain the water off), empty the vessel, rinse it well and take
another quantity of water. Continue the washing, changing the water
until no sand is found in the bottom of the vessel.

Dandelion and some other greens require trimming and looking over
carefully after reviving before the final washing.

When ready to cook, throw greens into an abundance of boiling salted
water and cook until tender.

The time required for cooking varies; narrow dock requires 20 m.,
purslane a little longer, pigweed 40 m., milkweed 2-3 hours, beet
greens 2½-3 hours, and dandelions 3½-4 hours. It is a good plan to
parboil dandelions.

When greens are perfectly tender, lift them carefully with a skimmer
from the water into a colander and press with a plate until as dry as
possible.

The water from all greens (except dandelion if at all bitter and too
large a quantity of narrow dock) is invaluable for soup stock, so pour
it off carefully from the sand that may be in the bottom of the kettle
even after the most careful washing.

When the leaves are long and stringy it is well to cut across the mass
of greens a few times before serving, but the flavor and character are
much impaired by too fine chopping.

Pass oil, lemon juice or quarters of lemon, French or Improved
Mayonnaise dressing, or Sauce Amèricaine with greens.

=Poke Shoots=--scoke--pigeon berry weed, and young, tender milkweed
stalks may be prepared and served the same as asparagus. Do not use
poke shoots after the leaves begin to unfold.

Canned greens make as valuable an addition to the winter supplies as
canned corn or peas.

=Kale=--borecole, should not be used until after heavy frosts in the
fall. Cook as other greens in boiling salted water 30-45 m. and serve
the same. If desired, raw nut butter may be added to the water in which
it is cooked; then lemon juice only will be required with it. It may
also be cooked with tomato, the same as cabbage, by being chopped or
cut fine before cooking. Onion and raw nut butter may be added to the
tomato.

=Okra--Stewed Whole=

Use only young, tender pods, cut off the stems, wash well and cook in
a small quantity of salted water (about 1 cup to each quart of okra)
for 30 m. or until tender. Season with cream, dairy or almond, or with
butter. Or, drain if any water remains, and pour over it a hot French
dressing. Melted butter may be used in the dressing instead of oil.

Never cook okra in an iron vessel.

=Okra--Sliced, Stewed=

Slice pods of okra across and cook with 1 cup of salted water to each
pint of okra until tender, 25-30 m. Drain or not, according to what is
to be added. Stewed tomatoes, strained or unstrained, almond or dairy
cream, sauce 16, 18, 19, or 34, or hot French dressing may be poured
over it. When strained tomatoes are used, the okra and tomato should
simmer together about 10 m. Add a little heavy cream, butter or oil and
salt just before serving.

=Onions--Boiled=

Select onions of about equal size. Peel them, then at the root end cut
into the onion about ⅓ of the way at right angles. This causes the
onion to cook tender at the heart. Let stand in cold water 20 m. to 1
hour. Put into boiling salted water and cook until tender, ¾-1½ hour.
The water may be changed after 15 m. boiling. Drain, add cream, cream
sauce or butter, heat a moment (do not boil with cream), serve. Some
prefer onions plain with a little of the liquid in which they were
boiled.

Drain young onions slightly when about half done, pour on milk and
simmer until tender.

=Onions--Stewed=

Cut peeled onions into halves, then into quarters, and slice across in
thin slices. Put into just enough boiling salted water to cook tender;
dry out well and serve plain or add a little oil or melted butter,
hot cream or cream sauce. Serve sometimes over plain boiled or mashed
potatoes. Raw or steamed nut butter may be cooked with the onions.

=Onions--Baked=

Select large, perfect onions; peel, and boil until about half done;
drain, put into a baking pan, sprinkle with salt and crumbs, pour a
little oil or melted butter over and bake, covered part of the time,
until tender.

Onions may be dried after boiling, wrapped in oiled paper, baked and
served with melted butter or cream sauce.

=Onions--Raw=

Slice onions and let them lie in cold water (no salt) for an hour or
more, changing the water occasionally. Drain, dry and serve with salt,
salt and oil or lemon juice or with French dressing. If in a hurry to
use them, dip sliced onions quickly into boiling water, then into cold
water and serve as before. Sprigs of parsley are sometimes passed after
dishes containing onions to destroy the odor in the breath.

=Oyster Plant=

Oyster plant--vegetable oyster--salsify, is one of the most delightful
vegetables. It should not be used until after heavy frosts and is at
its best in the spring after being in the ground all winter. Whatever
is dug more than is to be used each time, should be kept in sand in a
cool place.

To prepare for cooking, soak in cold water 3 or 4 hours, or over night.
Scrape on a vegetable board with a knife and drop each root into a
large quantity of cold water as soon as scraped to keep it from turning
dark.

When very fresh, oyster plant will cook in 10 m., but late in the
season it often requires a half hour. Cook until tender only, not soft.

The flavor of the oyster plant is in the water, so there should always
be some liquid left to form part of the sauce.

A little cream is required to develop the flavor of oyster plant.

Water and cream are better than milk.

Milk and a little butter may be used when cream is not obtainable. Raw
or steamed nut butter may be used in place of either, and olive oil
instead of butter gives an appropriate flavor.

If there should be dark spots through the oyster plant, be sure that
every particle is removed, as one little piece with a dark spot in it
will flavor the whole dish.

The carbohydrates of oyster plant do not include starch.

=Stewed or Creamed Oyster Plant=

Cut scraped roots into slices ¼-⅓ in. thick according to size, and drop
into the water in which they are to be cooked, an equal quantity,
usually. Boil without salt for 10-25 m. When nearly tender, add salt.

To the oyster plant liquor, add a little heavy cream, and when boiling,
add flour blended with water to make of a creamy consistency; salt if
necessary. Chopped parsley may sometimes be added, and a little celery
salt occasionally, but oyster plant will not admit of the addition of
many flavors. If to be served on toast or rice, or in a rice border, a
little onion juice may be added.

=Oyster Plant with Drawn Butter Sauce=

Cook oyster plant in 2-in. lengths in a small quantity of water. Add
sauce 40, heat, serve on toast or rice.

=Oyster Plant with Celery or Corn=

Use ⅓ or ½ cooked celery or corn in recipe for stewed oyster plant.

Any of these dishes may be served as a second course at dinner with
beaten biscuit with or without ripe olives.

=Parsley=

When parsley is fresh, wash, shake and keep in a thick paper sack near
the ice. When withered, put at once into ice water until refreshed.

To dry, pick off the leaves and stand in a warm place. It is better
than not any when fresh is not obtainable.

=Parsnips=

The parsnip is another vegetable not good until after heavy frosts,
and is much sweeter and richer in flavor when left in the ground until
spring.

=Boiled Parsnips=

Scrape or pare parsnips, cut into halves or thirds in flat slices
lengthwise; cook in boiling salted water until just tender, 20 m. to 1
hour according to age and size. Serve plain or with hot cream or butter
poured over.

Parsnips may be steamed instead of boiled.

=Stewed Parsnips=

Cut parsnips into slices crosswise, ½-¾ in. thick, or if large, cut
into quarters first, then slice. Cook in small quantity of water until
just tender. Serve with cream, cream sauce, or egg cream or drawn
butter sauce.

=Browned Parsnips=

Lay slices of boiled or steamed parsnips in baking pan, pour over a
little cream, oil or melted butter and sprinkle with sugar. Brown
delicately in oven. Or, dip in oil or butter and flour and brown in
quick oven.

=Mashed Parsnips=

Rub parsnips through the colander; season with salt only, or with salt
and cream. Heat and serve.

=Fricassee of Parsnips=

Boil sliced parsnips in milk without salt. When tender add salt and
thicken slightly with flour stirred smooth with milk. Serve on toast.

=Peas=

Green peas should be neither too old nor too young. When they are small
and soft they have no character, but if too old they are hard and
flavorless. To be at their best they should be cooked the day they are
gathered.

=Green Peas--Stewed=

For fresh tender green peas, wash the pods, shell and put at once into
boiling salted water. Washing after shelling takes away much of the
sweetness. Cook until tender, 15-25 m. There should be very little
water left when they are done. When nice and sweet they require no
seasoning but salt. Serve plain, with just enough of the water in which
they were cooked to moisten them. A little sweet cream, butter or cream
sauce may be added.

Peas that have become withered should be shelled and allowed to stand
in cold water for an hour before cooking.

When peas are a little old they require longer cooking, and should
have a little sugar in the water in which they are cooked. A small
sprig of mint improves the flavor of old peas, but the positive mint
flavor should not be distinguishable.

Canned peas of an inferior quality drained and boiled in fresh water
with sugar and mint are sometimes hardly distinguishable from fresh
peas. A sprig of parsley may be stewed with peas instead of mint.

=Peas--Parisian Style=

Cook in boiling, salted water with parsley and onion; add sugar, and
thicken the liquid a trifle.

=Peas--German Way=

Put a spoonful of butter in the saucepan, add peas, salt and a spoonful
or two of water, cover close and cook until tender, about half an hour,
perhaps.

=Peas With Corn=

Combine green peas and corn as beans and corn in succotash.

=Peas With New Potatoes=

Cook peas and small new potatoes together. Cover with cream or thin
cream sauce.

=Melting Sugar Peas=

This is the name of one variety of the edible podded peas. They have a
delightful flavor peculiar to themselves. Wash and drain the pods and
cut like string beans. Cook in a small quantity of boiling salted water
until tender, about 30 m. Add cream, cream sauce or a little butter.
Heat and serve.

=Potatoes=

There is great diversity of opinion in regard to the value of the
potato as a food. Some, because of its belonging to the family of the
deadly night shade, the same family as tobacco, think it should be
used sparingly if at all, while others consider it (when baked, at
least) one of the most wholesome foods. Its use is often prohibited by
physicians in some forms of indigestion and for those rheumatically
inclined.

The solid part of the potato is almost entirely starch, so it serves as
bulk in combination with nitrogenous foods.

“Potatoes which have grown on the surface of the ground or which have
been exposed to the light frequently turn green, and such tubers
contain abnormal amounts of solanin, as do old and shriveled potatoes
which have sprouted. It is best not to use such old potatoes, but if
they are eaten the flesh around the sprouts should be cut away, as this
portion is particularly liable to contain solanin.”--_C. F. Langworthy,
Ph. D. Farmers’ Bulletin, 295. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture._

Solinine is a vegetable alkaloid which may produce serious results as
it is of about the same nature as belladonna and other poisons of that
class.

Soak new potatoes for a short time only in cold water before cooking,
but old ones for at least 2-3 hours.

In paring potatoes, put them into cold water so that the dirt will not
adhere to the flesh. Pare not too thick and throw at once into clear
cold water.

When salt is sprinkled over potatoes after cooking it absorbs the
moisture and renders them more mealy.

=Baked Potatoes=

No other way of preparing the potato renders it so mealy and digestible
as proper baking. Wash and scrub the potatoes thoroughly without
breaking the skins, lay them on the grate of a moderately hot oven
without touching each other, so that there will be a free circulation
of heat around each potato. When the oven is too hot, potatoes will be
soggy and indigestible. Bake until just done; do not try with a fork
but by pressing with the thumb and finger. When done, serve _at once_
in an uncovered dish, or lay a napkin in a deep dish and fold over the
potatoes.

The most perfect way to serve a baked potato is to work it between
the folds of a towel in the hand without breaking the skin until soft
and mealy all through. Lay each potato on the grate again until all
are done. Potatoes may be broken apart in the center and a sprig of
parsley laid in when serving on an invalid’s tray or to individuals,
but all must be done quickly, as a few moments’ delay after the potato
is done will spoil its lightness.

If for any reason baked potatoes must be kept waiting, wrap them in a
thick towel and lay in a warm place.

When in a hurry for baked potatoes, pour boiling water over them just
before laying them in the oven.

Some think potatoes are whiter and more mealy if boiled until nearly
done and then finished in the oven.

Perhaps the most perfect way of baking potatoes is to lay them on a
wire stand in a close covered kettle without any water, over a moderate
fire.

=Boiled Early Potatoes=

Put pared potatoes into rapidly boiling, salted water. Do not allow
water to stop boiling. When nearly done add ½-1 cup cold water. Drain
as soon as done. Shake and dry uncovered, over fire. Serve in napkin.
When obliged to stand for a few minutes, throw a clean towel over the
uncovered kettle to absorb the steam.

=Boiled Late or Winter Potatoes=

Put potatoes into cold, slightly salted water. Bring to the boiling
point as quickly as possible. When half done, drain, add cold water and
boil again. Drain as soon as done, sprinkle with salt, shake over fire
until dry. Serve in napkin or uncovered dish.

=The Irish Way=

Put potatoes in slightly salted cold water; when the water boils add a
small quantity of cold water; repeat this process 2 or 3 times; when
done, drain, shake until dry and send a few at a time to the table.

=Potatoes in Jackets=

Wash thoroughly, peel off a narrow strip around the potatoes the long
way. When tender, drain, sprinkle with salt, shake, peel and serve, or
serve without peeling. Taking off the strip around the potatoes causes
them to burst and become mealy, and makes them easier to peel while
still giving the flavor so much liked by many.

=Steamed Potatoes=

Cook, without paring or with a narrow strip only taken off, in steamer
over hot water with a few sprigs of fresh mint. Dry in the oven.

Allow at least 10 m. more for steaming potatoes, either with or without
their “coats,” than for boiling.

=Small New Potatoes=

Wash small new potatoes, boil or steam, sprinkle with salt, shake over
fire until skins begin to crack, serve in napkin.

Or, rub the skins off with a coarse towel (coarse salt in the towel
helps) or scrape the potatoes. After cooking and draining, crack each
by pressing lightly with the back of a spoon. Lay in dish, pour hot
cream or milk and butter over and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

=Creamed Stewed Potatoes=

Cut potatoes into small pieces or slice not too thin; cook until almost
tender; drain, put into cream sauce in double boiler and cook ½ hour
longer. Whole small potatoes or large ones in quarters cooked until
tender may be served in cream sauce the same.

=Creamed Warmed-Over Potatoes=

Cold baked potatoes are much the best for warming over. Slice baked or
boiled potatoes or cut into small pieces and put into cream sauce, with
or without celery salt or stalk or a little chopped onion, and simmer
slowly 15 m. Sprinkle with parsley in serving.

Or, pour milk over potatoes, cover and heat slowly 15-20 m. If raw nut
milk is used heat a half hour. A little onion may be added if desired.

=Water Creamed Potatoes=

Thicken boiling water slightly with flour, add salt, onion or celery if
desired, and sliced potatoes. Simmer 15-20 m.

Or, put a little oil or butter into the saucepan, add flour, then
boiling water and potatoes.

=Hashed Creamed Potatoes=

Chop cold potatoes, mix with cream sauce, put into baking dish,
sprinkle with crumbs and brown in oven.

=Hashed Browned Potatoes=

Mix cream, oil or melted butter and salt with chopped potatoes. Spread
evenly in well oiled frying pan, pour a very little water over if
oil or butter are used, cover and heat slowly without stirring. When
delicately browned on the bottom, fold or roll like an omelet and serve
on a hot platter with celery tops or a sprig of parsley.

Or, pour brown sauce over potatoes in baking dish, sprinkle with oil
and heat in oven. A little milk or consommé may be added.

=Improved Parisian Potatoes=

Cut balls out of large pared potatoes with vegetable scoop. Cook in
boiling salted water until just or hardly tender. Drain, roll and shake
in thin drawn butter or cream sauce, sprinkle with parsley, serve as
border of timbales or as garnish for other meat dishes.

=Mashed Potatoes=

Very large, or irregularly shaped potatoes may be used for mashing.
Have kettle, fine colander and masher hot, with hot milk or cream in
the bottom of the kettle. Rub nicely boiled potatoes, a few at a time,
through the colander into the kettle _as soon as done_. Beat very
thoroughly until smooth and creamy. Add more hot milk if necessary but
do not make too soft or the flavor of the potato will be lost. Mashed
potatoes should be served at once, but if obliged to stand, make them
a little softer, keep hot in double boiler and beat occasionally to
restore the smoothness.

=Potato Cakes=

Shape cold mashed potato into cakes, brown on both sides on oiled
griddle, or brush with cream, oil or melted butter and brown in oven.
Serve as soon as done. When egg is added to potato cakes, they fall
soon after removing from the fire and become solid and soggy; also the
characteristic flavor of the potato is to some extent destroyed.

=Browned Mashed Potato Slices=

Cut mashed potato (which has been molded in a brick shaped or small
round tin dipped in cold water) into rather thick slices. Dip in beaten
egg, then in crumbs, and brown in quick oven. Serve with or without
sauce. Slices may be served with a poached egg on each.

=Potato Purée=

Add rich milk to mashed potatoes to make like thick porridge, spread on
hot platter as a foundation for cutlets, croquettes, slices of broiled
nut meat or nicely poached eggs. Garnish with parsley or other green.

=Baked Sweet Potatoes=

Wash large sweet potatoes without breaking the skins, bake in a
moderate oven until they will yield to pressure between the thumb and
finger.

Or, boil until nearly tender and finish in the oven. Serve at once.
Sweet potatoes will bake in a shorter time than Irish potatoes.

=Boiled Sweet Potatoes=

The most delightful boiled sweet potatoes I ever ate were prepared
in the following manner; Cook pared potatoes in a small quantity of
water until nearly tender, drain if necessary (but it ought not to be
necessary), cover with a towel and let stand on the back of the stove
for an hour or longer, shaking occasionally. Potatoes may be boiled
until tender and laid on a tin in the oven a few moments to dry.

=Mashed Sweet Potatoes=

Prepare and season the same as mashed Irish potatoes. Serve with tomato
cream sauce.

Or, put into oiled baking dish, sprinkle with crumbs and heat in oven.

=Mashed Pumpkin=

Select a nice, rich, fine grained pumpkin, saw into halves, remove the
seeds and fibre with a spoon and cut into small pieces without paring.
Steam, or stew in a small quantity of water. Drain if watery in cheese
cloth. When dry, mash and season with cream or butter and salt. Heat
in double boiler or oven, stirring. Serve in mound on hot dish, or put
into baking dish, sprinkle with crumbs and brown in oven.

=Baked Pumpkin=

Place halves of pumpkin from which the seeds have been removed, cut
side down upon a tin. Bake until tender and dry. Scrape from the shell,
mash, season and serve.

=Baked Pumpkin--Individual=

Cut pumpkin into not too small pieces and lay cut side down on waxed
paper in baking tin. Serve as baked potatoes.

=Radishes=

Wash radishes well with brush, trim off all but the small green leaves,
stand in ice water ½-1 hour. Serve on glass dish with cracked ice, or
in a bed of shredded lettuce or of spinach leaves, or with a parsley
border.

Pare winter radishes and cut into quarters. Serve sprinkled with
parsley, or as other radishes.

=Spinach=

Wash spinach the same as other greens, p. 253. Cook in boiling salted
water until tender, 10-30 m. Lift from the water with skimmer into a
colander. (Save water for soups and sauces.) Press dry with a plate.
Lay in hot pan and cut across a few times but do not chop; return to
colander, pressing in firmly, to mold. Turn the dish in which it is to
be served over the colander and unmold. Garnish with triangles of toast
and hard boiled eggs. Pass oil, quarters of lemon or lemon juice, Sauce
Amèricaine or French or Mayonnaise dressing with it. Many prefer it
with salt and oil alone. It may also be served with cream sauce, or
drawn butter with lemon juice.

Overcooking develops a strong flavor and causes spinach to lose its
bright green color.

When spinach is young and sweet, it may be cooked without the addition
of water by covering close and heating slowly at first; but when there
is danger of its being bitter it should be cooked in plenty of water.

=Spinach with Cream--Delicious=

Pour hot cream over cooked spinach in vegetable dish.

Spinach is sometimes rubbed through a colander after cooking and served
with whipped cream, for luncheon or supper.

=Summer Squash=

Cut squash into inch thick pieces, steam, or stew in a small quantity
of water; drain in cheese cloth. Mash, season, heat and serve.

If you ever use butter for seasoning in cooking, use it with summer
squash; though a little heavy cream, almond or dairy, is very nice.
Never use roasted peanut butter with squash.

Only those squashes which are young enough to cook with the skins and
seeds are suitable for stewing, as the skins and seeds contain the
flavor.

=Baked Ripe Summer Squash=

Bake whole; open, remove seeds, scrape pulp from skin, season and serve
as above. This pulp makes very delicate squash cream pies.

=Summer Squash with Corn=

Add ½ cup stewed green corn to each pint of cooked summer squash.
Season with salt and cream.

=Winter Squash=

Winter squashes vary so much in quality that no one way of cooking
will do for all. There are some varieties from which the skin may be
peeled like a tomato, after steaming; others are so hard that it is
impossible to pare them; from these scrape out the pulp with a spoon
after steaming; others still, are better to be pared before steaming.
When soft and watery after cooking, dry in the oven before mashing, and
again afterwards if necessary. Some watery squashes have a rich flavor
when well dried out.

=Mashed Winter Squash=

Saw squash in halves, remove the seeds and fibre with a spoon, cut into
quarters or eighths, pare or not according to the variety, lay inside
down in the steamer and cook over boiling water until tender. Remove
from the shell if not pared, mash through a fine colander, season if
soft with butter or cream and salt, or with salt only; if dry and mealy
like the “Delicious,” use plenty of milk and cream with salt. Beat well
and serve.

=Mashed Baked Squash=

Bake halves of squash from which the seeds have been removed, cut side
down until tender, 1-2 hours or longer. Scrape pulp clean from the
shell, mash, add salt, beat well and serve. Baked squash is so sweet
that it requires no seasoning but salt, though a little milk or cream
may be added if it is very dry.

=Baked Squash--Virginia Way=

Bake pieces of desired size, the shell side up, on waxed paper in
baking pan. Serve on platter, allowing each guest to season to taste,
and eat from the natural dish.

=Tomatoes=

As the tomato, though a fruit, is prepared and served in so many ways
as a vegetable, we will follow custom and consider it under that head;
but it must be borne in mind that it should not be served or eaten in
combinations unsuitable for other acid fruits.

The most desirable way to serve the tomato is uncooked when well
ripened. When perfectly ripe the skin will peel off without any
preparation, and it may sometimes be loosened by rubbing the tomato all
over firmly with the back of a silver knife; but when more convenient
to use the hot water method, the tomatoes do not need to be soft nor to
have a cooked taste.

First--have a kettle with an abundance of perfectly boiling water,
also a pail with plenty of the coldest water you can get, ice water if
possible. Put a few tomatoes (not enough to cool the water much) into a
wire basket. Plunge into the boiling water, let rest an instant if very
ripe and a second longer if quite solid, then lift the basket and set
quickly into the cold water, then turn the tomatoes out into the water
and leave them there. Repeat the process, take care each time that the
water is boiling before dipping the tomatoes into it and renew the cold
water when necessary.

Tomatoes may be put into the boiling water and transferred quickly to
the cold water with a skimmer. When thoroughly cooled, set without
peeling into the ice box until ready to use.

=Raw Tomatoes=

Peel, slice into not too thin slices, or cut into quarters or sixths
from the blossom end just deep enough for the pieces to spread apart
without separating. Serve with salt or with some of the salad dressings
as a garnish for meat dishes, or as fresh fruit with sugar or sugar and
lemon juice. With sugar and heavy cream my grandfather used to think
tomatoes were more delicious than peaches and cream.

=Stewed Tomatoes=

Slice tomatoes into sauce pan and bring to boiling point slowly, boil
up well, only, season with salt and serve. Long boiling frees the acid
of tomatoes and renders them less wholesome. Tomatoes require more salt
for palatability than any other article of food.

=Steamed Tomatoes=

Put rather small tomatoes on pan in steamer, steam from 10-15 m., or
until tender. Serve on hot toast or crackers or thin round slices
of broiled nut meat with a dainty spray of parsley or chervil, for
luncheon or supper; allowing each guest to season to taste. If desired,
drawn butter, cream sauce or oil may be passed.

=Broiled Tomatoes=

Cut tomatoes in halves without peeling, dust with salt and fine cracker
crumbs, broil over hot coals, skin side down, 15-20 m. Serve plain or
with Sauce Amèricaine or any desired dressing with wafers or toast.
Firm tomatoes may be cut into thick slices and broiled on both sides.
They may be just browned and set in the oven to become tender.

=Tomato Purée=

    1 qt. stewed tomatoes
    1 or 2 sticks of celery
    1 teaspn. sugar
    1 tablespn. butter
    A few slices of onion
    1 tablespn. flour
    chopped parsley
    salt

Heat tomatoes, crushed celery and sugar for 15 m. Simmer onion in
butter without browning, add flour, then tomato, boil up well, strain
and add chopped parsley. Serve on toast or with boiled rice or with
some meat dish. Very nice on toast with sliced hard boiled eggs.

=Turnips=

The later varieties of turnip are by far the best though some of the
earlier varieties are sweet and tender. As they need to be grown
quickly turnips are never good in a dry season but will be pithy and
strong. Turnips require the greatest care in cooking. If they are
over-cooked 5 m., they will begin to turn dark and will have a strong,
disagreeable flavor. For that reason they are better to be cut into
thin slices. They must be boiled rapidly.

=Boiled Turnips=

Wash, cut into quarters or sixths if large, pare very thick, cut into
½ in. slices, put into perfectly boiling water; boil rapidly for 25
m., or until just tender. Add salt at the end of 20 m. or when nearly
tender, if at all; nice, sweet turnips are delicious without salt.
Drain thoroughly, in cheese cloth if convenient. Serve plain, or
with Chili sauce, Sauce Imperial or Sauce Amèricaine; or pour cream
sauce over after draining; or pass oil, oil and lemon juice or French
dressing with them.

=Ruta-Bagas=

There are white and yellow ruta-bagas or Swedish turnips, and both are
richer in flavor and more nutritious than common turnips. The yellow
ruta-bagas are especially sweet and rich. Prepare, cook and serve the
same as turnips, except that the ruta-bagas require a little longer
time for cooking. They are delightful served with Chili sauce, but are
so rich and sweet of themselves that no sauce is necessary.

=Mashed Turnips=

Mash well drained boiled turnips with potato masher in hot pan. Do not
put through colander. Season with salt and if not sweet a little sugar.
Serve plain or with sauce 57, 58 or 75.

=Vegetable Stew=

Cook separately 1 pt. of string beans, 2 small potatoes and 2 small
carrots cut into small pieces, and 1 pt. of green peas. When tender,
drain, put all together, add salt and cream or a thin cream sauce.

This makes a very pretty as well as a palatable dish.


STARCHLESS VEGETABLES

    Artichokes, Globe
    Artichokes, Jerusalem
    Asparagus
    Beans, young string
    Beets
    Brussels Sprouts
    Cabbage
    Carrots
    Cauliflower
    Celery
    Cucumbers
    Egg Plant
    Endive
    Kohl-rabi
    Leeks
    Lettuce
    Okra
    Onions
    Oyster Plant--Salsify
    Radishes
    Ruta-bagas
    Spinach and all “greens”
    Squash, summer
    Turnips


STARCHLESS AND SUGARLESS VEGETABLES

    Asparagus
    Beans, young string
    Cabbage, red and winter
    Cauliflower
    Egg Plant
    Endive
    Lettuce
    Oyster Plant--Salsify
    Radishes
    Spinach and all “greens”

The proportion of sugar in nearly all of the other starchless
vegetables is small.




CHESTNUTS


Since chestnuts are so largely composed of starch though they also
contain a large proportion of albuminoids, from 8.5 to 14.6 according
to different authorities, we allow them to follow vegetables while not
classing them with them. One writer says “they might have been included
among the bread stuffs.” London vegetarians often serve a tureen of
plain boiled chestnuts in place of potatoes.

The recipes are for the large imported chestnuts. The smaller native
ones require a longer time for cooking. The dried chestnuts which we
sometimes find in the stores require 3 hours for boiling.

=To Shell and Blanch Chestnuts=

Boil whole chestnuts rapidly for 10 m. Leave in the hot water, shell
and remove the brown covering while warm.

=Boiled Chestnuts=

Cook blanched chestnuts in salted water until just tender, 10-20 m.,
drain, serve plain or with sauce 14, 16 or 17. Or, boil whole for 25 m.
and serve in the shells.

=Chestnut Purée=

Mash boiled chestnuts, add salt, and cream or milk and butter. Beat
well, heat in double boiler, serve in center of platter surrounded by
nut meat cutlets or croquettes which in turn are garnished with boiled
small onions, Brussels sprouts or flowerets of cauliflower suitably
seasoned; or purée may be served with globe artichokes, green peas,
stewed cucumbers or mashed dry green peas.

=Roasted Chestnuts=

Make at right angles small incisions at the point of the chestnut. Bake
10-20 m. in a rather hot oven, stirring occasionally, or put into a
corn popper and shake over the coals.

=Chestnut and Banana Salad with Cream Dressing=

Prepare bananas as suggested for salads, and cover with Cream
Dressing--Sweet. Cut boiled chestnuts in quarters and mix lightly with
bananas and dressing. Serve in cups or on dainty china plates garnished
with flowers or leaves.

=Chestnut Purée--Whipped Cream=

For luncheon, supper or dessert

Add sugar or honey with dairy or cocoanut cream and vanilla, to mashed
chestnuts; heat, pile on dish with spoon in rocky form or force through
vegetable press, and surround with whipped cream.

=Vanilla or Raisin Chestnuts=

Boil blanched, fresh or dried chestnuts until tender (fresh 15 m.,
dried, 3 hours). When almost tender, add sugar or honey to water and
when the liquid is nearly boiled away, flavor with vanilla; finish
in slow oven; serve as confection. Raisin pulp instead of vanilla is
delightful.




SALADS


Since experience has taught us that the delicate machinery of the body
requires oil to keep it running smoothly, salads as one of the most
agreeable means of supplying this need, have been growing in favor.

In our recipes for salad dressings, we have endeavored to give
sufficient variety in oils to suit all tastes and circumstances.

“Vinegar--acetic acid, is about ten times as strong as alcohol,
and makes more trouble in the stomach than any other acid except
oxalic.”--_Dr. Rand._

“No acid should be taken into the mouth with starch as it will
prevent the action of the saliva; but if starches have been properly
masticated, and a proper amount of saliva mingled with them, lemon
juice will not interfere with the digestion of starch in the
stomach.”--_Dr. Kress._

For the above reasons, we use no flour or cornstarch in dressings, use
lemon juice as the acid, and exclude potato salad. Cold potatoes of
themselves are difficult of digestion and combining them with an acid
renders them still more so.


Secrets of Success

Use nuts as a garnish, or as an accompaniment to salads instead of
mixed with them, as they become tough quickly after touching the
dressing. Coarse chopped nuts may be sprinkled over the salad just as
it goes to the table.

In beans, green or red French, Lima or California are best for salads
since they do not cook to pieces easily.

The whites of hard boiled eggs are more digestible when ground fine, or
pressed through a wire strainer. When desired for fancy shapes they may
be poached separate from the yolks, p. 199.

Vegetables for salads must be crisp, tender and dry.

Gather lettuce early in the morning, put it into a closed pail or a
paper sack and leave in the refrigerator for a few hours; or if it
comes from the market slightly wilted, cover it at once with ice water
until revived. Never allow the wind to blow upon lettuce. Crisp, by
allowing it to stand in ice water after washing until just before
serving, then drain and shake in a wire basket or in mosquito netting,
cheese cloth or a netted bag.

Celery, parsley, spinach, endive and dandelion may be kept fresh the
same as lettuce and crisped in ice water before serving.

Always cut celery, never chop it. Wipe it dry before cutting and if
possible, roll in a dry towel a moment after cutting.

Unless cabbage is shaved thread-like it is better to be chopped.

In cooking carrots for salads, drain them when about half done and add
boiling water to finish cooking.

The apple, grape fruit and tomato are the only fruits with which a
French or Mayonnaise dressing is harmonious.

Dip ripe tomatoes quickly into perfectly boiling water, lift them out
and drop into cold water, change the water two or three times if ice is
not at hand, set them in a cold place, and peel just before serving.

Do not mix cut, colored fruits (like strawberries) with cream
dressings. Lay the pieces between the layers and on top of the salad.

It is seldom suitable to serve fruit salads with lettuce; some glass
dish with decorations of leaves, vines and flowers is prettiest.

As a rule, do not mix many kinds of fruit in one salad. One flavor
often destroys another.

Many of the fruit salads are suitable for desserts.

Cut oranges in about the middle of the section or just each side of
the membrane, leaving that out if convenient; then cut into pieces
crosswise.

Cut grape fruit in halves, then around the inside next to the skin,
and after removing the pulp, carefully separate it from the membrane.

When juicy fruits are to be used with any but fruit juice dressings,
they should be drained. The juices may be used for nectars, other salad
dressings or for pudding sauces.

Soak currants or pitted sour cherries in syrup made of one part sugar
and two parts water, for an hour or longer, then drain.

For most salads, bananas are better cut into quarters lengthwise, then
sliced across.

Pare, quarter and core choice, fine flavored apples, one at a time, cut
the quarters into not too thin lengthwise slices, place three or four
of the slices together and cut across into small wedge-shaped pieces.
Never chop apples for salad. Both apples and bananas should be prepared
just as short a time before the meal as possible and should be cut
right into the dressing. After being coated with the dressing they will
not turn dark.

Shred fresh pineapple according to directions, p. 44. For nut and cream
dressings cooked pineapple is preferable. After draining and drying
canned sliced pineapple, lay two or three of the round slices together
and cut into wedge-shaped pieces about ¼ inch across at the large end.

Keep orange, lemon, grape fruit or tangerine cups in cracked ice or ice
water until just before serving, then drain and wipe dry.

The edges of the cups may be pointed or scalloped, and if cups are
large the points may be cut deep, and then rolled down. Apple cups may
be kept in the same way, or the cut surface may be coated with dressing.

We marinate or pickle some ingredients by mixing them with lemon juice,
with or without salt, or with French dressing, a short time before
serving. Drain if necessary, before adding the dressing.

A wooden spoon which is used for nothing else is best for stirring
dressings while cooking. Dip in cold water and wipe it just before
using and wash in cold water immediately after.

Sour cream may be substituted for sweet cream in all dressings; a
little less lemon juice is required.

One-third water may be used with lemon juice for dressings if too sour.

Use plenty of salt in dressings for people accustomed to mustard and
pepper.

For uncooked dressings all the ingredients and utensils should be as
nearly ice cold as possible.

The yolks of five eggs may be used in the place of three whole eggs in
boiled dressings.

For salads with eggs, tomatoes or cabbage, a larger proportion of lemon
juice and salt is required, and with tomatoes a little sugar is an
improvement.


COOKED DRESSINGS

=★ Improved Mayonnaise Dressing=

    4 large eggs
    ⅓ cup oil
    ⅓ cup lemon juice
    1 teaspn. salt

Beat all the ingredients in the inner cup of a double boiler just
enough to blend well. Put into the outer boiler containing warm (not
hot) water, set over fire, stir with a wooden spoon continuously,
taking the inner boiler out occasionally and stirring well if there is
danger of cooking too rapidly. When the dressing begins to thicken,
remove at once from the fire and set in a dish of cold water which
was all ready, stirring until partially cooled. Strain through a wire
strainer.

The recipe for this dressing (with some unhygienic adjuncts) was given
to me in the early days of my work by a lady to whom a famous chef had
given it as a special favor; and to my mind its value is unequalled.
It has not an excess of oil like the regular mayonnaise, is easily and
quickly made and will keep well in a cool place, covered. I sometimes
use ½ cup of oil and ¼ cup of lemon juice, and sometimes just the
reverse, according to what I am using it over and the tastes of the
people for whom I am preparing it. Three eggs will do very well if one
needs to economize in eggs. ¼ cup of cream, whipped, may be added just
before serving for Cream Improved Mayonnaise.

=Butter Dressing=

Use melted butter and less salt in improved mayonnaise dressing.

=★ Boiled Salad Dressing--Large quantity=

    8-10 eggs
    1½ cup oil
    1 cup lemon juice
    2-3 teaspns. salt

Follow directions for improved mayonnaise dressing.

=No Oil Dressing=

    yolks of 2 eggs
    1 level teaspn. salt
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    whites of 2 eggs

Beat yolks, add salt and lemon juice, cook over hot water, cool; add
stiffly-beaten whites of eggs when ready to serve.

=Sour Cream Dressing=

Especially good plain on lettuce, and with flavorings for chopped
cabbage.

    1 egg
    ½ cup sour cream
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 tablespn. water
    ½-¾ teaspn. salt

Beat egg slightly, add cream, cook the same as boiled custard, cool,
add water, salt and lemon juice. When desired, water and lemon juice
may be flavored according to directions p. 28.

=Sweet or Sour Milk Dressing=

Substitute sweet or sour milk and 1 tablespn. of oil or butter for sour
cream in preceding recipe. Omit water and use 2 eggs if desired very
stiff.

=★ Cream Dressing--Sweet=

For fruits especially, but suitable for lettuce, cabbage, beets, celery
or carrots.

    1 cup heavy cream
    or ⅔ cup light cream
    3 tablespns. sugar
    3 large eggs
    3 tablespns. lemon juice

Beat cream, sugar and eggs in inner cup of double boiler; cook as
for custard, set dish in cold water; add the lemon juice gradually,
stirring, then a trifle of salt, strain.

⅔ only of the cream may be cooked and the remainder whipped and added
to cold dressing. In substituting sour cream for sweet, use 1-1½
tablespn. only of lemon juice.

=★ Nut Dressing--no eggs=

    2 slightly rounded tablespns.
    Brazil, almond, pine nut or
    roasted or unroasted peanut butter
    ⅓-½ cup water
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1-1½ tablespn. lemon juice

Rub butter smooth with water, cook just a moment, stirring. Remove from
fire, add salt and lemon juice, cool.

Some flavoring is an improvement with the unroasted peanut butter.

Roasted peanut butter dressing and improved mayonnaise dressing may be
combined with a very pleasing effect.

Use from ½-¾ cup strained stewed tomato in place of the water, and ¾
teaspn. of salt, for Nut Tomato Dressing.

=★ Almond Butter Dressing=

Add 2 tablespns. of sugar to the nut dressing made with almond butter
and you have one of the most delightful fruit salad dressings.

=Rhubarb Salad Dressing=

While the liberal use of rhubarb is not to be recommended on account of
the oxalic acid it contains, it affords variety in dressings and has
the advantage of always being at hand in the country when one gets out
of lemons.

    3 large or 4 small eggs
    ¼ cup oil
    ½ cup prepared rhubarb
    ½-⅔ teaspn. salt

Stew rhubarb without peeling, with not more than one tablespoon of
water to the quart of rhubarb. Rub through a fine colander or sieve,
mix in the proportions given, with the other ingredients and cook the
same as improved mayonnaise dressing.

Green gooseberries prepared in the same way may be used in the place of
rhubarb.

=Olive Dressing=

Make “No Oil” dressing with 1½ only, tablespn. lemon juice and just
before serving sprinkle over it two tablespns. coarse chopped ripe
olives.

=Tomato Dressing=

Excellent on apples, string beans, celery, cabbage and lettuce, on peas
croquettes, and for decorating.

    3 large eggs
    ¾ cup thick tomato pulp
    ¼ cup oil
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    1-1½ teaspn. salt

Drain juice from stewed tomatoes, rub pulp through strainer or
fine colander, combine with other ingredients and cook as improved
mayonnaise dressing.

=Orange Dressing=

    For suitable fruit salads.

    1-1½ cup sugar
    1 cup water
    ⅔ cup orange juice
    5-6 tablespns. lemon juice

Boil sugar and water to syrup; cool, add orange and lemon juice,
strain. If desired, flavor with oil of orange.

=Boiled Dressing with Cornstarch=

I insert this dressing with many apologies for the cornstarch, which as
we know, is entirely out of place in a salad dressing, and trust that
it will be used in emergencies only when eggs are very scarce.

    2 cups water
    ½ cup corn starch
    2 teaspns. salt
    3 eggs or 4 yolks
    ½ cup lemon juice

Boil salt and water, add the cornstarch which has been stirred smooth
with cold water; boil up, add beaten eggs and lemon juice; beat well,
cool.


UNCOOKED DRESSINGS

=French Dressing=

Suitable for vegetables, apples, tomatoes, eggs, legumes and nut foods.

The proportions of lemon juice and oil in this dressing vary from 1
part of lemon juice to 4 parts of oil, to equal parts of each, and in
extreme cases to the use of four or five times as much lemon juice as
of oil according to the ingredients of the salad and individual taste,
but the proportions most generally used are the following:

    ¼-½ teaspn. salt
    3 tablespns. oil
    1 tablespn. lemon juice

Mix salt and oil well, add lemon juice slowly, stirring, pour over
salad, serve at once. If flavorings are used, mix them with the salt
and oil before adding the lemon juice. My experience is that this
method of combining the ingredients gives the best results. A bit of
ice may be added while stirring, but if ingredients and utensils are
ice cold it will not be necessary.

=Orange French Dressing=

Let orange juice stand for a few moments with thin shavings from the
outside of the rind in it, strain and combine with the salt and oil as
above, using equal quantities of oil and orange juice or only ½ as much
of the juice. Serve over sliced apples or tomatoes.

=Grape French Dressing=

Equal quantities of grape and lemon juice with salt and a small
proportion of oil. Delightful over apples, oranges, grape fruit, pears
or peaches, or suitable combinations of the same.

=Honey French Dressing=

Use equal quantities of lemon juice and honey or three or four times
as much lemon juice as of honey, with oil and a trifle of salt, over
lettuce or suitable fruits. Honey and lemon juice without the oil may
be used by those who prefer it.

=Nut French Dressing=

Add water to any preferred nut butter until of the desired consistency;
then salt and lemon juice according to the ingredients of the salad.
Butter from either Brazil, almond or pine nuts is good. Raw pine nuts
have much the flavor of cheese. If unroasted peanut butter is used, the
flavor of onion or garlic or both is an improvement.

=Salad Entrée Dressing=

    1 tablespn. chopped parsley
    ¾ tablespn. chopped onion
    ¾-1 teaspn. salt
    ¾-1 teaspn. celery salt
    ½ cup olive oil
    ⅓ cup lemon juice

Mix dry ingredients, add oil, then lemon juice slowly, stirring.

=English Salad Dressing=

    1½-2 tablespns. sugar
    1 tablespn. oil
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    1 tablespn. shredded fresh mint, or ¼ teaspn. powdered dry mint

=★ Lemonade Dressing=

For lettuce and many fruits.

1 tablespn. each of lemon juice and water to each slightly rounded
tablespn. of sugar. Stir until sugar is dissolved. For juicy fruits,
use lemon juice and sugar only.

=Tarragon Dressing=

For fruits.

1 teaspn. chopped tarragon to each half cup of lemonade dressing.

=Orange Dressing=

    ¾ cup orange juice
    ¼ cup lemon juice
    3 tablespns. sugar
    rind of ⅛ of an orange

Cut thin slices from the yellow part of the rind; let stand with the
other ingredients for 15 m. Strain and pour over fruit. Omit rind for
strawberries, pineapple and such other fruits as it will not harmonize
with.

=Raspberry Juice Dressing=

Add sugar flavored with oil of orange, with lemon juice, to rich red
raspberry juice, the proportions depending upon the sweetness of the
raspberry juice. Serve over apple or apple and orange.

=★ Quick Cream Dressing--Sweet=

    5 tablespns. cream
    1½ tablespn. sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt
    lemon juice to thicken, perhaps about 1 tablespn.

Mix cream, sugar and salt, add lemon juice slowly, stirring until
dressing is thick, and be sure to stop when it is thick.

=★ Whipped Cream Dressing=

For shredded lettuce, chopped cabbage or cooked beets, and some fruits.

    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    2 tablespns. sugar
    ⅛ teaspn. salt
    ¼-⅓ cup of cream

Whip cream, sugar and salt together, chop lemon juice in lightly.

=Sour Cream Dressing=

    ½ cup sour cream
    1 teaspn. to 2 tablespns. lemon juice
    ½-1 teaspn. salt

Whip cream until just thick, add lemon juice and salt which have been
mixed. For lettuce or apples, use such flavorings as fresh mint,
tarragon, onion, chives, celery salt or seed when desired.

=For Sweet Dressing of Sour Cream=--Add 1½ tablespn. of sugar to lemon
juice in above recipe.

=Sour Milk Dressing=

    2 eggs
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    ⅔ cup sour milk
    1-1½ tablespn. lemon juice

Beat yolks with salt, add milk, then lemon juice gradually, stirring,
then the stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs. For a sweet dressing add 2
tablespns. of sugar to the whites of the eggs.

=Mayonnaise Dressing=

    yolk of 1 egg raw (some use 2 or 3)
    ½-1 teaspn. salt
    1 cup to 1 pt. of oil
    1-1½ tablespn. lemon juice to each cup of oil

Use only 1 cup of oil unless a very thick dressing is required. Have
all utensils and ingredients cold. In very hot weather only, set dish
in which dressing is made on chopped ice or in ice water. Use a soup
plate with a silver or wooden fork, or a bowl with revolving egg
beater. Beat yolk of egg and salt, add ½-1 teaspn. lemon juice, mix
well, then add oil, drop by drop at first, stirring constantly (one
way, some say). After a little, oil may be added faster. When mixture
becomes thick, stir in a little lemon juice. Do not allow it to get too
thick before adding lemon juice. When done the dressing should drop,
not pour, from a spoon.

If mixture shows signs of curdling, set dish on ice, continuing to
stir, and if it does not become smooth then, add a teaspoon of cream or
a little white of egg or a few drops of lemon juice, beating well. Or,
take another yolk, begin again more carefully, and when well started
add the curdled portion slowly.

If a hard boiled yolk is crushed and worked smooth with a spatula and
mixed thoroughly with the raw yolk, the dressing is not so apt to
curdle and the oil may be added a little more rapidly.

The tendency to curdling is very much lessened by adding the lemon
juice to the yolk before any oil is added.

=Cream Mayonnaise=

Add ½ or an equal quantity of whipped cream, or ½ to 1 stiffly-beaten
white of egg to mayonnaise at serving time.

=Green Mayonnaise=

Macerate with a spatula or in a mortar spinach, parsley or chervil,
tarragon, chives or green tops of onions, using a little lemon juice if
necessary. Express the juice and add to dressing.

=Mayonnaise Cream=

Whip ¼-½ cup of heavy cream, chop into it the beaten yolk of an egg,
add salt and lemon juice to taste. Chopped parsley may be sprinkled
through the dressing, or a little green or red vegetable coloring may
be used in it.


TRUE MEAT SALADS

For these salads, rich in proteids, the nut dressings are not required.
As a rule, lemon juice, lemon juice and salt, or the French dressing
with suitable flavorings will be most appropriate. Use the different
varieties of Mayonnaise with judgement.

=★ ★ Trumese and Celery Mayonnaise=

Take equal quantities (or any proportion desired) of diced trumese
and slender crescent slices of celery with a little very fine chopped
onion. Mix lightly with improved mayonnaise dressing. Pile in center of
lettuce border. Serve. Trumese may have been marinated. Onion may be
omitted. Nasturtiums, parsley, fringed celery or other garnishes may be
used with or without the lettuce.

=Hot Nut Meat Salad=

Make a custard of the yolk of one or two eggs or one whole egg, and one
cup of rich milk; add salt, a little grated or chopped onion, celery
salt if desired and two cups of diced trumese which has been marinated
with two tablespns. of oil, 1 or 2 tablespns. of lemon juice and a
little salt. Heat without over-cooking the egg. Serve on toast or in
the center of large wafers with stalks of fringed celery or with a
sprinkling of sliced crisp celery.

=Green French Bean and Cucumber Salad=

In the center of a lettuce or spinach leaf border place stewed green
French beans surrounded by a row of sliced cucumbers. Garnish with
white, green or yellow mayonnaise.

The combination of the different shades of green is very pretty. The
addition of nasturtiums gives a different effect.

=Novel Legume Salads=

Prepare different colored legumes according to directions for mashed
lentils, p. 185, very dry. Mold in block shaped tins and when cold cut
into cubes and serve in any desired border with improved mayonnaise
dressing. A rail fence of cucumbers sliced lengthwise may constitute
the border. The French dressing may be used, but there is nothing
quite equal to a mayonnaise dressing for mashed legumes.

=Legume Roses=

While warm, press mashed green peas or other legumes (a little softer
than for molding) through pastry tube in form of roses. Garnish with a
delicate vine and lemon points, or with the yellow mayonnaise.

=★ Helianthus (Sunflower) Mayonnaise=

This salad is to be served on individual plates. When it is the
principal dish for luncheon, use one egg to each plate, but with a
variety of other dishes two eggs will be sufficient for three plates.

Make a deep border of shredded tender lettuce leaves around a gilt
edged plate. In the center of the plate, pile as high as possible
the yolk of a hard boiled egg which has been pressed through a wire
strainer. Surround this with a border of the white which has also been
vermicellied. Then drop with a teaspoon improved mayonnaise dressing at
frequent regular intervals on the lettuce border. This salad gratifies
the senses of both sight and taste.

=Salad Marguerite=

Cut hard boiled eggs in halves lengthwise. Lay the halves on the
vegetable board, the flat side down, and cut each half carefully into
four pieces. Remove yolk from pieces, rub through wire strainer, place
in center of individual plates and surround with a wreath of shredded
lettuce or of tender spinach leaves. Then place pieces of white inside
down over the wreath, radiating from the center. Serve with French
dressing, or with roses of yellow or green mayonnaise around the
outside.

=Cottage Cheese and Radish Salad=

Surround a molded border of cottage cheese with radish lilies on
lettuce, endive, parsley, chervil or spinach border and fill the center
with green mayonnaise.

=★ Cottage Cheese and Pear Salad=

Pour French dressing in which drained canned pears whole or in halves,
have been soaked for an hour or two, over a mound of creamy cottage
cheese. Surround with the pears and garnish with geranium leaves or
ferns. Serve with crackers or cocoanut crisps.

=Additional Combinations=

To be served with any preferred dressing.

Baked or stewed California or red kidney or green French beans and
string beans.

Lima beans and eggs.

Baked beans and chopped cabbage.

Beans and tomatoes.

Halves or quarters of hard boiled eggs on lettuce--salad entrée or
improved mayonnaise dressing.

Cottage cheese mixed with sliced celery in balls or molds.

Cottage cheese and lettuce--salad entrée dressing.

Cottage cheese, apple and mint--English dressing, or with lemon juice
and sugar.

Cottage cheese and dried or fresh apple sauce (quite dry)--cream
dressing--sweet.

Cottage cheese and drained stewed or canned cherries--cream
dressing--sweet.

Cottage cheese and tomatoes.


VEGETABLE SALADS

=★ Snow Salad. Cabbage=

Add just as it is going to the table, whipped cream dressing, to 1 pt.
of chopped crisp white cabbage. Some of the whipped cream may be left
out of the dressing and dropped by spoonfuls on top of the salad.

=Lavender or Pink Salad=

Use purple or red cabbage in the place of white in snow salad. For
luncheon, the cream mayonnaise dressing may be used.

=Pink Salad No. 2=

Coarse chopped red beets with whipped cream dressing. ⅓ fine cut celery
improves the flavor.

=Hot Slaw=

    2 eggs
    ⅓ cup lemon juice
    1 tablespn. oil or butter
    2 level tablespns. sugar
    1 level teaspn. salt
    1 good pint chopped cabbage

Beat eggs in the inner cup of a double boiler, pour slowly over them
stirring, a boiling mixture of all the remaining ingredients except the
cabbage; add the cabbage and cook until just creamy. Serve at once.

=Cold Slaw=

Cool hot slaw, and just before serving, add ¼ cup of cream, whipped.
The slaw is excellent without the cream, however.

=Cauliflower Salad=

Serve flowerets of cauliflower, cooked according to directions, p.
246, masked with improved mayonnaise or with cream improved mayonnaise
dressing on a bed of shredded lettuce in a border of lettuce leaves
garnished with parsley or nasturtiums. Pass dressing.

=★ Dominion or French Sam’s Salad=

Skim from a pan of thick sour milk, equal quantities of cream and milk.
Beat lightly together and mix with nice crisp shredded lettuce and
salt. I wish I could tell you how highly I prize this recipe. Try it.

=English Salad=

Tear in pieces with the fingers, nice crisp lettuce, mix with it a few
leaves of shredded fresh mint, and pour English salad dressing over.
Serve at once.

=Spinach Leaf Salad=

Select the tender inside leaves of spinach, wash well and serve with
French or mayonnaise dressing or in almost any way that lettuce is
used, the flavor of which they almost excel.

=Salad à la Russe, or Russian Salad=

Combine as great a variety of starchless vegetables in different
colors as convenient. Celery, onions, carrots, beets, green peas,
red and green French beans and string beans make a good combination.
Turnips, asparagus, cauliflower, chives and parsley may be used also,
and some like a flavoring of celery seed.

Cut the larger vegetables into small pieces or dice, or into fancy
shapes with vegetable cutters (the pieces left after cutting out the
shapes with vegetable cutters may be chopped and used as the base of
the salad, or for another salad or for soup); cut the string beans into
diamond shapes and chop the onion very fine. Pile the lightly mixed
vegetables in the center of a border of lettuce or spinach leaves; lay
some of the brightest pieces on the top and pour French dressing over
all.

=Beet and Olive Salad=

In the center of a platter with a lettuce or variegated beet leaf
border, place marinated sliced or chopped beets. Surround the beets
with roses of cream mayonnaise or mayonnaise cream with stoned ripe
olives between.

=Cucumber and Onion Salad=

Cut short crisp cucumbers in halves lengthwise, hollow out the center
to within a half inch of the rind, pare shells carefully and drop into
ice water. Slice or chop the centers, mix with fine cut raw onion,
salt and French or improved mayonnaise dressing. Drain and thoroughly
dry shells, fill with mixture, lay on leaves of lettuce, sprinkle with
chopped parsley and serve. Cut long cucumbers into two-inch lengths,
remove centers, set rings upright on lettuce and fill. Pass dressing if
more is desired.

=Asparagus Mayonnaise=

Place six-inch stalks of cooked asparagus in rail fence style just
inside a lettuce or endive border on a platter, with lemon cups of
mayonnaise (one for each person to be served) in the center.

=★ String Bean and Celery Salad=

Cut tender celery into eighth-inch crescents, pour over it lemonade
dressing without the water in the proportion of one cup of dressing to
each half cup of celery. Stand in a cool place for an hour or longer,
then serve over young string beans which have been cooked in salted
water until tender. Canned stringless or string beans may be used.

=Stuffed Tomato Salad=

Fill hollowed out tomatoes with a mixture of drained, salted, grated
cucumbers, fine chopped onion and improved mayonnaise or French
dressing. Serve in nest of lettuce with dressing.

Or, use celery with improved mayonnaise dressing, in place of cucumber
and onion, with border of nuts.

=Additional Combinations=

Dressings given only where some special ones are required.

Beets--sliced or chopped--lemon juice and sugar.

Beets and celery--lemonade, cream or mayonnaise dressing.

Brussels sprouts, whole or in halves. Garnish with halves of nuts
sometimes.

Cabbage and onion--nut dressing without egg, of roasted or unroasted
peanut butter.

Cabbage and pecan nuts.

Carrots--cooked, sliced or chopped, with French, nut or improved
mayonnaise dressing in green border; nasturtiums sometimes.

Ring of fresh grated cocoanut around mound of grated or fine ground raw
carrot with cooked cream or whipped cream or mayonnaise dressing in
lettuce border.

Raw carrot, grated or chopped fine, and celery or onion.

Carrot cups of the large end of boiled carrots. Filling of carrot and
onion or celery--French or mayonnaise dressing--row of green peas
around inside edge of cup.

Celery and tomato--cream, almond, cream mayonnaise or French dressing.

Celery or beet and cocoanut--cream or mayonnaise dressing--lettuce.

Celery and green peas--nut meats if wished.

Celery and chopped lettuce--onion if desired.

Celery and Brazil nut slices--sweet or sour dressing.

Cucumber and tomato--lettuce--improved mayonnaise or French dressing.

Cucumber and radish.

Cucumber and onion--whipped sour cream dressing.

★ Peas and onion--nut dressing--no eggs, of roasted peanut butter. May
be served in lemon cups with a half nut meat on top.

Peas and carrot--onion if liked.

Molds of chopped cooked spinach on slices of nut meat, or cold boiled
beets or turnips--mayonnaise, improved mayonnaise or French dressing.

Blanched inside leaves of raw spinach and fine chopped onion or chives.

String or wax beans and egg.

Wax beans, nuts or stoned ripe olives, lettuce.


FRUIT SALADS

=★ Apple and Pineapple Salad with Cream Dressing=

Prepare apples and pineapple, equal quantities, or ⅓ only of pineapple,
according to directions on p. 275. Just at serving time, combine
with cream dressing--sweet, and serve in dainty glasses or cups
(individual), each on a small plate with a doily and a cut flower or
leaf or a spray of some delicate vine. This is a sample of what may be
done with any of the followings combinations and many others:

Apple with orange or strawberries, red raspberries, canned cherries,
cherries and celery, or celery.

Banana with apple or strawberries, red raspberries, pineapple, orange
or celery.

Pineapple with orange, red raspberries, strawberries, cherries or
celery.

Orange with red raspberries, strawberries, cherries or celery.

Fresh ripe peaches, seeded sweet grapes with solid flesh, and sweet
apples are among the suitable fruits for salads.

The almond butter dressing is as desirable as the cream dressing.

Pear and apple or apple or pineapple alone with the almond dressing are
especially delightful. The whipped cream dressing may be used when more
convenient.

=★ Currant and Red Raspberry Salad=

1 pt. each red raspberries and very ripe currants, 1 or 2 teaspns.
of fine chopped tarragon, basil or sassafras leaves, with lemonade
dressing of 1½ tablespn. each of lemon juice and water and two
tablespns. of sugar. Serve in glasses or cups with suitable decoration.
The flavorings may be omitted.

Pineapple with either the currants or raspberries without the
flavorings is excellent. Orange and red raspberries; grape fruit
and strawberries; apple and strawberries; apple, grape fruit and
strawberries or orange; apple, banana and strawberries and other
combinations of juicy fruits will suggest themselves from the
preceding. When a sweeter fruit than currants is used the proportion of
sugar in the regular lemonade dressing is sufficient.

=★ Mint Fruit Salads=

Oranges or grape fruit or apples with shredded mint and lemonade
dressing (water omitted in first two) are the most delightfully
refreshing of salads.

=Nut and Banana Salad=

Roll small peeled bananas in any of the sweetened cream dressings,
then in chopped nuts. Serve on individual plates with a spoonful of
dressing, with orange points and candied cranberries or cherries, or
frosted currants for garnish.

=Apple and Cranberry Salad=

Grind ripe cranberries fine and mix with a liberal supply of one of
the sweetened cream dressings. Prepare apple also with the dressing
and place the two in high alternating diagonal rows on a platter with
lettuce border; or prepared apples may be placed on the platter and
spoonfuls of the cranberry dropped on top. Whole berries may dot the
lettuce border.

=Sweet Fruit and Cocoanut Salads=

Fresh grated cocoanut in center of dish, border of black or red
raspberries, blueberries, sliced or halved peaches or bananas, cream
dressing--sweet or whipped cream dressing. No lettuce.

=Oriental Salad=

Grape fruit and oranges--mayonnaise. The dressing sometimes tinted
delicately with pink and green or green only.

=Peach Salad=

Sprinkle shredded basil, tarragon or sassafras leaves over sliced or
halved pared peaches and cover with lemon juice and sugar. Garnish or
serve, with blanched almonds.

Or, serve peaches with cream dressing--sweet or whipped cream dressing
in cups, with nuts.

=Cooked Apple Salad=

Dry, fresh or dried apple sauce, or baked whole or quarters of apples
(all without sugar) cream dressing--sweet, nut, whipped sweet or sour
cream, French or mayonnaise dressing. Serve decorated to taste.

=Love Apple Salad=

Whole peeled tomatoes in nests of lettuce, or with some leaf or flower
garnish, with a cream, French or mayonnaise dressing.

Or, cut tomatoes into quarters or sixths from the blossom end just deep
enough for the pieces to spread apart without separating.

=Grape Fruit and Celery=

Equal quantities of grape fruit and fine sliced celery with mayonnaise
or improved mayonnaise dressing in grape fruit cups with edges cut in
deep points and rolled down. Some green garnish.

=Additional Combinations=

Apples--salad entrée dressing.

Apple and onion--roasted peanut, improved mayonnaise, French or whipped
sour cream dressing.

Apples and cucumbers--Dominion salad dressing.

Apples, celery and a few raisins--one of the sweet dressings, garnish
with blanched almonds.

Celery with apples or tomatoes or pineapple or apple and tomato, à la
string bean and celery salad.

Peach and tomato with or without basil or tarragon.

Sweet apples alone and in combinations--almond butter dressing.

Tomato and banana--some sweet dressing.

Grape Fruit--French dressing on lettuce.

Tomato and grape fruit--lemon juice and sugar, or orange French
dressing.

Red raspberries with currant juice.

Canned or fresh red raspberries--lemon juice or lemon juice and sugar.

Apples, celery and butternut meats--improved mayonnaise dressing.

Tomato and apple--honey French dressing.

Cumquots--Tom Thumb oranges, and Malaga grapes--fruit juice dressing.




DESSERTS AND PUDDINGS WITHOUT EGGS


=★ Apple Dumpling--Baked=

Peel, quarter and core nice tart apples, lay inside down, in flat
pudding dish or pan, cover and set in gentle heat so that the apples
will become just warm all through.

_Crust_--Make universal crust with ½ to 1 cup of liquid according to
the quantity required. Roll ½-¾ in. thick, cut with biscuit cutter, lay
close together on warm apples. Cover with a pan that will allow the
crust to rise underneath it, set in warm place and let crust get very
light.

Start the dumplings early enough to give plenty of time at each stage.
When crust is light, bake uncovered at first, in moderate oven ¾-1
hr., or until apples are well cooked and crust thoroughly baked. Serve
with creamy, or hard sauce, or with sugar and nut or sterilized dairy,
cream. Do not put any sugar, butter, salt or water on the apples. Leave
them plain to contrast the apple flavor with the sauce. A pastry crust
may be used with the apples, but is not so satisfying. A crust of
boiled rice laid over the apples and baked covered, is very nice with
them.

=★ Apple Dumpling--Steamed=

Place the apples in the bottom of an oiled kettle (aluminum
preferably), the same as in the pudding dish for baking. Pour warm
water over to one-third or one-half cover, or just enough to cook them
without scorching. Cover apples with crust as in baked dumpling. Let
crust rise very light, cover the kettle close (put a weight on the
cover), and set in moderately hot place over the fire. When boiling
well, carefully move the kettle back where it will boil slowly but
steadily. Place an asbestos pad under it if necessary. Cook without
removing the cover 25-30 m. from the time it begins to boil. Serve
with any sauce suitable for baked dumplings.

=Peach Dumplings=

Cut universal dough into rounds as large as a saucer, pile halves of
peaches in center, press edges firmly together around peaches, lay in
deep pan and bake when crust is light. Serve with almond or dairy cream
or any suitable sauce. Or, cut rounds smaller, lay peaches on one and
cover with another. Wet edges and press together.

=★ Fruit Tarts or Dumplings=

Put blueberries, blackberries, raspberries, gooseberries, cranberries
or any desired fruit in the bottom of a pudding dish; mix sugar, a
little flour and salt together and add to berries. (Blueberries will
require a little water.) Warm, and cover with crust as for baked apple
dumpling. Bake when crust is light and serve without sauce.

Cranberries and gooseberries may be baked with very little if any sugar
and served with hard sauce.

A tart of unsweetened peaches is nice served with plain or whipped
cream.

=★ Blueberry Pot Pie--Delicious=

    Universal crust of ¾ cup milk
    3 pts. berries
    ¾ cup sugar
    ¾ tablespn. lemon juice
    ¾-1 cup water

Put blueberries with sugar in bottom of preserving kettle, pour water
over, cover with crust, let rise and cook the same as steamed apple
dumpling. No sauce.

Cranberry and gooseberry pot pie may be made in the same way and served
with hard or creamy sauce.

=Orange Roly-Poly=

    4 oranges
    ⅔-1 cup sugar
    ⅓-½ teaspn. grated rind
    salt

Peel all white from oranges. Divide into unbroken sections. Make
universal crust of 1 cup of milk with a large measure of oil. When
light, add salt with flour to make a dough stiff enough to roll; roll
in oblong sheet, spread with orange sections, sprinkle with sugar,
roll close and carefully, moisten the edges at the ends and pinch well
together. Bake in moderate oven 35-45 m., or steam 1½ hour. Serve with
lemon, hard, or foamy white sauce, or with cream.

=Dutch Apple Cake=

Spread a thin layer of universal crust on shallow baking pan; press
warm eighths of apples, sharp edge down, into crust, sprinkle with
sugar, let rise, bake, covered part of the time if necessary to cook
the apples; serve as “tea-cake,” or with sauce as pudding. Let dough
extend up the sides of the pan a little to keep the juice from running
off.

Make =Peach Cake= the same way, with halves or slices of peaches.

=Short Cakes=

Bake universal crust in flat square or round tins. Split, spread with
butter or not, and cover lower half with a generous layer of fruit.
Turn the upper half over so that the cut side is up, and cover that,
too, with fruit.

A meringue or fluff may be used sometimes for ornamentation, but if
fruit is properly prepared and freely used, cream will not be required;
it would better be saved for some more necessary place.

Two very thin crusts may be used, but the fruit flavor does not
penetrate them as it does the split crust. Make the crust stiff enough
to give a fine grain but not so stiff as to be hard. It may be baked in
not too thick biscuit for individual serving.

Crusts may be baked several days beforehand and kept closely covered.
To serve, dip in cold water, slip in paper bag, set in hot oven for
about 10 m. and use as fresh baked crust.

Do not use cake, or a sweetened crust, and call it “shortcake.”

One in writing of strawberry short cake says: “It must be remembered
that the fruit must be served on a _genuine shortcake_ not the sweet
cake of the restaurant and of too many households, but the plain,
unsweetened cake that was the delight of our fathers, and which is
still the joy of those who have been so fortunate as to have made the
acquaintance of the blessings of the tasty and nutritious cookery of
the olden times.”

Some unsweetened, flaked, cereal preparations, crisped in the oven,
make delightful shortcakes by sprinkling a few flakes on a plate,
covering them with prepared fruit, then sprinkling the fruit generously
with flakes. They must be served as soon as prepared.

=Shortcake Fillings=

=Strawberries=--Leave out a few small berries or cut some of the
smaller ones in halves or quarters and set one side. Save also some
of the largest and cut into halves, or leave whole with the stems on.
Put a little butter into a granite pan, add berries with not too much
sugar and a little salt. Crush over the fire with wire potato masher
just enough to make juicy. Mix well with butter, stir carefully until
just warm. Add small berries, spread crusts, place whole berries, or
cut halves cut side up, on top. Serve shortcake at once on dessert tray
or platter with a cluster of ferns or geranium or other green leaves at
the side.

Or, cut berries in small pieces just before serving, sprinkle crust
with sugar mixed with a trifle of salt. Cover with berries and sprinkle
with sugar, lay on upper crust and cover the same.

Or, chop not crush berries with sugar and serve with sweetened juice of
berries or with crushed strawberries sweetened, to be dipped over each
slice as served.

=Raspberries=--red or black--Prepare and serve same as strawberries.

=Blueberries=--Stew berries with sugar and water, add a little lemon
juice, a trifle of salt and thicken a little, hardly enough to know
they are thickened, with corn starch.

=Peaches=--Cut into eighths or slice, fresh ripe peaches just before
serving. Lay them over thin crusts and sprinkle with sugar. Arrange
pieces around the outside edge of the top crust and serve with nut or
dairy cream.

Or, stew halves of peaches in syrup, thicken syrup a little with corn
starch and add a bit of butter, lay peaches inside up, on crusts and
pour juice over. Juice may be delicately flavored with almond. A little
lemon juice may be added.

=Apricots=--fresh--Prepare the same as peaches.

=Apricots=--dried--Soak over night, add 1-1½ cup sugar to 1 lb. of
fruit, heat slowly, just boil, remove fruit and spread over cakes,
leaving 1 qt. of juice. To this add ½ cup of sugar and thicken with
4 level tablespns. corn starch. Add 1 tablespn. lemon juice and if
desired, 2 tablespns. butter. Pour over shortcake, or preferably serve
with it.

=Prunes=--Stew prunes with a little sugar, stone, cut into small pieces
and spread on crust; thicken juice a trifle and turn over all. Prune
shortcake is delicious served with almond cream or covered with whipped
cream. A little lemon juice may be added to the prunes.

=Honey=--Split and butter crust; spread thick with honey, serve hot.

=Maple=--Cook maple syrup and butter or cream together and serve warm
over crust.

Canned fruits of nearly all kinds may be used in the winter for
shortcakes by thickening the juice a little with corn starch.

=Steamed Blueberry or Other Fruit Pudding=

Make ingredients for universal crust into stiff batter or soft dough,
according to the juiciness of the fruit to be used with it; mix and
beat well, let rise; add dried or fresh blueberries (huckleberries),
cranberries, raspberries, blackberries, fresh or dried or drained
canned, cherries, or any convenient fruit; put into well oiled mold,
cover or not and steam 1-1½ hour. Serve with cream and sugar, or with
foamy, hard or cocoanut sauce.

Or, make a dough stiff enough to knead, shape into biscuit, fold and
press berries in while shaping, lay balls on pie pan, let rise and
steam. Or, make into one large loaf, and steam. Figs or dates cut with
shears into small pieces may be used and the pudding served with
orange or any of the sauces already given.

=★ Plain Steamed Pudding=

Steam sweetened or unsweetened universal crust in large or individual
molds ¾-1 hour; serve with molasses, maple, berry, foamy or creamy
sauce.

=★ Dutch Boiled or Steamed Pudding=

Make universal crust with only ¼ cup of oil to the cup of liquid and
mix as stiff as bread dough. Put into a well buttered double cheese
cloth, let rise, drop into perfectly boiling water and boil 30-40 m.
Remove from cloth, split and lay on dessert tray, spread with butter,
cover with nice flavored molasses and serve hot. Try it before you
condemn it. The crust may be steamed instead of boiled, but it is
beautifully light when boiled. Molasses, or maple or brown sugar syrup
may be heated with a little butter and served over pudding as sauce.

=Cottage Pudding=

Bake rather stiff, slightly sweetened universal crust and serve with
Annie’s Strawberry (“_o_” of Hard Sauce Variations) or any preferred
sauce. Add fine cut, drained stewed prunes to pudding occasionally
before baking and serve with a sauce made of the juice.

=Pear Cobbler=

    2 rounded qts. halved or quartered pears
    ¾ cup sugar
    2½-3 tablespns. flour
    a trifle of salt
    1½ cup water

Sprinkle mixed sugar, flour and salt over pears in pudding dish, pour
water over and cover with universal crust. Bake when crust is well
risen. 1¼ cup of sugar and 1½ tablespn. of lemon juice give character
to the filling.

=Mother’s Peach Cobbler--Billy’s Favorite=

Line pudding dish with pie paste. Fill with pared, whole peaches. Mix
sugar, a little butter and flour together; pour boiling water over,
stirring. Boil up well, cool, pour over peaches, cover with crust,
bake in moderate oven until peaches are soft.

=Apple Scallop=

Mix together sugar, flour and butter in the proportion of 1 tablespoon
of flour and 2 of butter to each cup of sugar with a little salt and
sprinkle between layers of eighths of apples in pudding dish; cover
dish and bake slowly until apples are tender, then uncover for a time.
If apples are dry, a few spoonfuls of water may be put in the dish.
Bake about 1 hour in all.

=Mary’s Scalloped Apple Pudding=

Put a layer of quartered apples, sugar and a trifle of salt in the
bottom of a pudding dish, then a sprinkling of dry bread crumbs;
continue layers to fill the dish, leave crumbs on top, pour over all
water to cook slowly for several hours until apples are a rich red
color. Serve with or without cream or other sauce. If preferred the
pudding may be baked with less water for a shorter time. Use cracker
crumbs instead of bread and you have a different pudding.

=Scalloped Raspberries, Blueberries or Peaches=

Put fruit and crumbs or very thin slices of bread in layers in pudding
dish, sprinkle each layer with sugar and have crumbs on top. Cover and
bake about ½ hr., uncover to brown, serve hot or cold with cream--nut
or dairy. Leave out sugar and serve with cream sauce.

=Bread and Currant Pudding=

Put small pieces of dry bread in pudding pan, sprinkle with English
currants, pour enough hot, slightly salted water over to moisten well,
bake in moderate oven 1-2 hours. Serve with any desired sauce or nut or
dairy cream.

Or, sprinkle sugar over bread before adding water and serve plain or
with unsweetened sauce. The currants give the pudding a nice flavor if
it is otherwise plain.

=Bread and Milk Pudding=

Use hot nut or dairy milk instead of water in preceding recipe.

=Steamed Fig Pudding=

    1 pt. stale bread crumbs
    1 large cup fine ground figs
    1½ cup rich milk
    salt

Mix all together; use a trifle less milk if crumbs are quite moist,
steam 2-3 hours; serve as soon as taken from the steamer, with creamy,
orange or cream sauce, or with cream whipped or plain; never with lemon
sauce.

If to be served with unsweetened cream, put ¼ cup of sugar in pudding.

=★ Plum Pudding of Crumbs=

    1 rounding pt. of dry bread crumbs
    1 small cup molasses
    ¼ cup sugar
    ½ cup seeded raisins
    2½-3 cups milk
    salt

Steam, covered, 4-5 hours. Stand out of steamer for 10-15 m. before
unmolding. The quantity of milk will depend on the kind of crumbs.
Serve with vanilla flavored orange syrup sauce, plain pudding sauce or
almond cream sauce.

The combined flavors of vanilla and orange in sauces are especially
suitable for plum puddings.

Any of the puddings may be steamed in cups or small molds.

Raised cake with fruit, baked or steamed, may be served for plum
pudding. Keep wrapped in oiled paper.

=American Plum Pudding=

    5 cups coarse dry bread crumbs
    2½ cups grated carrot
    1½ cup molasses, or 1¼ cup sugar
    2 teaspns. salt
    1 lb. each raisins and figs cut fine with shears
    ½ lb. currants
    ¼ lb. citron sliced
    2-4 cups boiling water

Steam 4-6 hours. Serve with sauces given for plum pudding of crumbs.

=Plum Pudding=

    1 qt. (pressed down a little) stale bread crumbs
    2½ cups water (1 cup grape juice and 1½ cup water if convenient)
    ¾ cup English currants
    ¾ cup raisins, ground
    ½ cup citron, ground
    2 cups chopped apple
    1 cup chopped, blanched almonds
    4 or 5 tablespns. browned flour
    2 teaspns. salt

Mix crumbs, almonds, browned flour and salt and add apples. Pour
boiling liquid gradually over dried fruits, mixing, until they are
separated; then combine all ingredients. Turn into well buttered molds,
cover and steam 3-4 hours. Serve with orange syrup sauce or with hard
sauce flavored with vanilla and oil of orange, or with egg cream sauce.

½ to 1 cup of brown sugar and 1 or 2 tablespoons lemon juice may
be used in the pudding. The quantity of liquid will vary with the
conditions, but a moderately soft batter is required.

=★ Steamed Whole Wheat Pudding=

    1 cup milk
    1 cup molasses
    2 cups whole wheat flour
    1 cup raisins or currants
    ½ cup oil
    salt

Mix all ingredients but flour, agitate liquid with batter whip until
full of bubbles, sprinkle flour in slowly with the left hand, keeping
up the agitating motion with the right. When the flour is all in and
the batter foamy, put into well oiled mold, let stand in a cold place
½ hour or longer, then set in steamer and steam 3 or 4 hrs. Serve hot
with creamy, foamy, hard or other sauce. 2¼ cups of bread flour may be
used.

=Tapioca Puddings--Granular Tapioca=

Any of the granular preparations--minute tapioca, cassava, manioc or
manioca may be used.

    5 tablespns. tapioca
    1 cup warm water
    soak 10-30 m.

  _Syrup_--

    ¾-1 cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt
    3 cups water

Stir together until dissolved.

=Apple=--Prepare syrup in flat bottomed granite or porcelain lined
pan. When boiling, drop in, inside down, quarters of 6 medium sized,
juicy apples. Cook until nearly tender, add soaked tapioca, pressing
it down into the syrup, cover dish and simmer slowly until tapioca is
transparent, 5-15 m. Serve warm (not hot) or cold, plain or with orange
egg cream or custard sauce if cold; or orange or cocoanut flavored
hard sauce if warm; or with nut or whipped dairy cream.

=Peach=--Make the same as Apple Tapioca, using twice as many peaches,
in halves.

=Strawberry, Raspberry and Other Berries=--Cook soaked tapioca in the
syrup and pour over the berries; mix carefully and pour into a pudding
or fancy dish. Serve cold. A fluff of the fruit may be used for the
sauce, if any.

=Stewed or Canned Fruit=--Cook soaked tapioca in the syrup and pour
over drained canned fruit. Serve warm, with the juice of the fruit
(to which a little lemon juice and sugar have been added if needed),
thickened a trifle with corn starch or arrowroot; or, cold with whipped
cream, custard or other sauce.

=Fig=--Steam figs until tender (30-35 m.), cut in pieces with shears
and stir into tapioca cooked in the syrup. Serve warm or cold with
orange egg cream sauce.

=Prune=--Cook tapioca in syrup with a little lemon juice if desired,
and add quartered, slightly sweetened stewed prunes. Serve with rich
juice of prunes, cream or whipped cream.

=Apple Tapioca Pudding--Pearl or Flake Tapioca=

Soak ½ cup pearl or flake tapioca in 5 cups of warm water for 3 hours
or over night. Pour over whole pared cored apples in pudding dish.
Cover dish and bake until apples are tender and tapioca transparent.
Serve warm with hard, foamy or creamy sauce, or cold with sweetened
whipped cream.

If preferred, ¾-1 cup of sugar may be added to the soaked tapioca and
the pudding served plain or with unsweetened custard sauce or cream.
When the pudding is to be served at the table, it may be covered with a
meringue while hot and delicately browned in the oven. Use with other
fruits the same as granular tapioca.

=★ Sister Bramhall’s Tapioca Cream=

    ⅓ cup granular (½ cup pearl or flake) tapioca
    ½-¾ cup sugar
    1 qt. milk
    1 teaspn. vanilla, or no flavoring
    ½ teaspn. salt

Put all together in pudding dish, soak for 1 hour, stirring; then set
in oven and bake slowly, stirring, until tapioca is transparent; brown
over top at last; serve warm or cold.

May bake without stirring for 2 hrs. The pudding may be cooked entirely
in a double boiler. 1 cup of raisins may be used for variety.

=Sago Cream--instead of Ice Cream=

    ¾ cup sago
    ¾ cup sugar
    3 cups heavy cream or 4 of thinner cream
    2 cups water with heavy cream, or 1 with thinner
    1½ teaspn. vanilla

Soak sago in warm water 1-3 hrs., add to cream and sugar in double
boiler, cook, stirring, till sago is transparent; remove from fire, add
a pinch of salt and the vanilla. Serve cold in glasses with two halves
of a candied cherry or a bit of bright jelly on top. Strawberries cut
in quarters, or red raspberries, may be placed in layers with the cream
and a few berries laid on top.

=★ Cream of Rice Pudding=

    3½ pts. milk
    ½ pt. cream
    1 cup sugar
    ½ cup rice

Mix all together in pudding dish, set on top of stove or in oven and
let come slowly to the boiling point, stirring often. When boiling, set
in oven and bake slowly until rice is soft (2 hrs. or longer); stir
occasionally to keep the top stirred in and to break the rice so that
it will be smooth and creamy when done. If pudding becomes too thick
while baking, add hot water; it should be quite thin when warm as it
thickens in cooling. Brown the top delicately just before removing from
the oven. Serve very cold the next day after making. In serving be sure
to dip from the top to the bottom for each plate.

If you are using the ordinary polished rice, boil it for 5 m. in a pint
of water, drain and rinse in cold water before adding it to the milk.
When more convenient, cook the pudding in a double boiler until the
rice is smooth and creamy, then turn into pudding dish and brown in
oven, stirring the top in two or three times.

=Rice Pudding--Raisins=

Add 1 cup of raisins to preceding recipe before or during cooking. For
a delicious change the raisins may be ground and added when the pudding
is half done. English currants, fine cut dates, figs or citron may be
variously added. Servings of pudding may be garnished with blanched
almonds.

=Cocoanut Rice Pudding=

Add 1 to 1½ cup cocoanut to cream of rice pudding and use ¾ cup sugar
only.

=Nut Cream of Rice Pudding=

    2 tablespns. rice well washed
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt
    3 tablespns. almond or other nut butter
        rubbed smooth with 1 qt. of water

Cook, stirring often, in oven or on top of stove until creamy, then
brown. May flavor just before it is done.

=“Indian” Rice Pudding=

    2 tablespns. rice
    ½ cup molasses
    ½ teaspn. salt
    2 qts. milk

Bake in slow oven 4 or 5 hours, stirring.

=★ Emeline’s Indian Pudding=

    ⅞ cup Rhode Island meal (⅔ granular)
    ½ cup molasses
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    1½ teaspn. salt
    2 qts. skimmed milk

The older the milk without being sour, the better.

Mix salt, sugar, molasses and flour together in pudding dish and pour
over them stirring 3 pts. of the milk boiling. Set dish in oven, pour
the remaining pint of milk, cold, into the pudding without stirring;
cover and bake very slowly for 3 or 4 hrs. Cool pudding before dipping
into it, to allow the jelly to set. Serve another day warm or cold,
plain, or with cream whipped or plain.

The pudding may be baked for an hour before the cold milk is poured
in. Add 1 qt. rich sweet apples, in eighths, or stoned dates with or
without grated cocoanut, sometimes.

=Mrs. Hinsdale’s Indian Pudding=

    2 qts. water
    3½-4 cups granular meal
    1½ cup raisins
    salt

Stir meal gradually, with wire batter whip, into rapidly boiling,
salted water, add the raisins, turn into well oiled mold, cover and
steam 3-5 hrs; serve hot with maple syrup, cream and sugar, or hard
sauce. In early days it was served with molasses.

The pudding may be sweetened and served with cream only. It should be
stiff enough to slice well.

Chopped or broken nuts may be added for variety.

=Graham Porridge Pudding=

Take ½ or ¾ milk and ½ or ¼ water, add sugar and salt, stir in
gradually graham flour till thick, cook in double boiler 1 hr. or
longer; serve warm with cream, nut or dairy, or mold and serve cold
with sweet fruit sauce or cream. Omit sugar and serve with honey, maple
syrup or molasses or with molasses sauce.

=Blanc Mange=

    1 qt. milk
    ⅔ cup corn starch wet with another cup of milk
    1 tablespn. sugar
    salt

Heat milk to boiling, add corn starch, boil half a minute, mold, serve
with cold cream sauce, sub-acid fruit sauce, with custard or with nut
or dairy cream. Fine cut dates may be added to blanc mange sometimes.

=Rice Flour Blanc Mange=

    1 qt. milk
    ⅓ cup sugar
    9½ level teaspns. rice flour
    ⅓ teaspn. salt

Blend flour with part of the milk, heat remainder of milk with sugar
and salt to boiling, stir in flour, beat smooth, cook 15 m., pour into
molds which have been dipped in cold water. Serve with sauces for blanc
mange.

=★ Caramel Jelly=

Tie 2 to 4 tablespns. cereal coffee in double cheese cloth and steep
in 1 qt. of milk in double boiler for 20 m.; squeeze the milk all out
of the cloth, add enough more milk to make a full quart and proceed as
in blanc mange. Serve with custard sauce or sometimes with plain or
whipped cream flavored with vanilla. Pudding may be flavored and the
cream plain.

¼ cup of strong cereal coffee may be used with ¾ qt. of milk when more
convenient.

=Raspberry Jelly=

    1 qt. milk
    1 scant cup corn starch
    ½ to 1 cup sugar
    1 pt. raspberries

Blend corn starch with part of the milk and stir into remainder of
milk when boiling; add sugar and mashed berries, turn into mold, cool.
Unmold on to dessert plate and surround with whipped cream roses, or
with spoonfuls of cream with a whole berry here and there.

=★ Farina Banana Cream=

    3 cups milk
    1 cup cream
    3½-4¼ level tablespns. farina
    3-4 tablespns. sugar
    3 medium sized, very ripe bananas

Heat milk and cream with sugar in double boiler, stir in dry farina,
cook 1 hr. Spread in layers with sliced bananas. Serve cold in cups or
glasses the day it is made. The farina will be very thin when done,
but will thicken to the consistency of cream by cooling, and if it is
thicker than that it is not good.

Omit bananas, flavor cream with vanilla and serve cold in glasses for
Farina Cream.

=Almond “Custard”=

Rub 2 tablespns. almond butter smooth with 1 cup of water; add 1 or 2
tablespns. sugar and ¼ level teaspn. salt; boil up well; serve warm or
cold in cups or glasses with cake, wafers or buns. Flavor with vanilla
or with vanilla and almond if desired.

=★ Imperial Raspberry Cream=

    1 pt. cream
    1 cup sugar
    ¾ pt. raspberry juice

Dissolve sugar in juice, add to boiling cream, boil, stirring, until
of the consistency of thin cream. It will be much thicker when cold.
Serve in glasses with cookies, sticks or wafers. May be used as a sauce
for cottage or other puddings; especially suitable for Irish moss or
gelatine blanc mange. Grape and other fruit juices may be used.

=Steamed Apples--Cream=

While hot, sprinkle nicely steamed apples with sugar in individual
dishes. Serve cold with suitable nut or whipped dairy cream.

=Clabber--for summer only=

Put fresh warm milk into an individual bowl for each member of the
family. When it has turned and become a smooth, blanc mange-like cake,
serve in the bowls with sugar sprinkled over, for dessert or supper.

=Green Corn Pudding=

    3 cups corn (12 ears)
    1 pt. milk
    ¼ to ½ cup sugar
    ½ level teaspn. salt

Grate mature corn; mix with milk and sugar in pudding dish; bake in
moderate oven 1-1½ hr. Serve plain or with cream or butter.

=Irish or Sea Moss Blanc Mange=

Sea or Irish moss is so desirable as a food that it should be used more
generally. It can be bought at groceries or drug stores at from 25 cts.
per lb. upward, according to where it is bought. Do not confound it
with Iceland moss.

It is useless to try to follow any exact rule either by weight or
measure for the proportion of moss to the milk, yet the preparation is
simple. Take up a little in the fingers, what might be called a small
handful, wash it in several cold waters until all the sand is removed.
Drop it into the milk cold or warm. (It is very convenient to have it
tied loose in 2 or 3 thicknesses of netting, cheese cloth is too fine.)
Cook in the inner cup of a double boiler, or in a pail set in hot
water, lifting the netting up and down occasionally, until the milk is
of a creamy consistency; then remove moss if it is in the netting, if
not, strain through a fine wire or hair strainer. Sweeten, and flavor
with vanilla or rose, or leave plain. (Some prefer the seaweed flavor.)
Turn into a large pudding mold or individual cups or molds which have
been dipped in cold water. It will harden very quickly in a cool place.
Serve with fruit juice, stewed fruit or cream. Pineapple sauce is very
suitable.




DESSERTS AND PUDDINGS WITH EGGS


“Far too much sugar is used in food. Cakes, sweet puddings, pastries,
jellies, jams are active causes of indigestion. Especially harmful are
the custards and puddings in which milk, eggs and sugar are the chief
ingredients.

“The free use of milk and sugar taken together should be avoided.”

Desserts made of tart fruits and bread should be avoided by those with
a tendency to acid stomach.

=Elizabeth’s Indian Pudding--Superior=

    2 qts. milk
    1 cup corn meal
    2 tablespns. flour
    ¼-½ cup butter
    1 egg
    ⅔ cup molasses
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt

Mix meal and flour, pour 1 qt. boiling milk over, stirring; boil well,
add butter; combine egg, molasses, sugar, salt and the remaining quart
of milk and add to the corn meal mixture; bake for 2 hrs., stirring
occasionally. Serve warm or cold, plain or with cream, nut or dairy.

=★ Corn Cake Pudding=

Use 2 eggs and 3 tablespns. sugar to each quart rich milk and turn over
crumbs, dice or small pieces of corn cake; sprinkle top with sugar and
bake in moderate oven until eggs are set. May use currants and raisins.

=★ Brown Bread Pudding=

    1 cup brown bread crumbs
    1 pt. milk
    3 tablespns. sugar
    2 or 3 eggs
    salt

Add stiffly-beaten whites of eggs last; bake in pan of hot water or in
slow oven, covered part of the time; serve warm with hard sauce or cold
with whipped cream.

=Victoria Dessert--Impromptu=

    1 cup milk
    2 or 3 eggs
    1 tablespn. sugar
    salt
    slices of stale bread

Cut slices of bread into desired shape and size; soak in mixture of
milk, eggs and sugar until moistened, not soft; lay in hot buttered pan
and brown delicately in quick oven; serve at once with fresh fruit,
jelly, marmalade or suitable fruit or pudding sauce.

2 whites of the 3 eggs may be left out and beaten stiff with sugar
and some fruit marmalade or jelly and used as a sauce. Drained canned
peaches or apricots, rubbed through a colander and beaten well make a
nice sauce, especially with a little whipped cream. Even nicely stewed
apples are good.

=★ Steamed Crumb Pudding=

    1 pt. hot milk
    1-1¼ cup dry bread crumbs
    ¼-½ cup sugar
    2 eggs
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

If bread was very light, the larger quantity of crumbs will be
required. Pour milk over crumbs, add sugar, cool; add beaten eggs and
vanilla. Steam in large or small molds 1-1½ hr. Unmold, serve with
orange, hard, jelly, foamy, plain or any desired sauce. Vanilla may
be omitted. Fine cut raisins or citron, dried blueberries, English
currants or any desired fruit (about ½ cup) may be added to the
pudding sometimes; also fresh red or black raspberries, blueberries or
blackberries.

=Steamed Cabinet Pudding=

    3 eggs
    3 tablespns. sugar
    3 cups milk
    1 cup fruit (currants, raisins, citron), chopped fine
    3 pts. stale bread or cake crumbs
    salt

Beat eggs, add sugar, salt, milk, pour over crumbs, let stand 1 hr. Use
1 tablespn. of softened butter in oiling a three-pint mold; sprinkle
mold with fruit, pour in batter, steam in vessel of hot water in oven
for 2 hrs. Serve with creamy sauce.

=Plain Boiled or Baked Custard=

    1 qt. milk
    3-4 eggs
    3-4 tablespns. sugar

Beat eggs with sugar just enough to blend whites and yolks, add milk,
stir until sugar is dissolved; cook, stirring over hot water until the
custard thinly coats the spoon; remove quickly from fire, add flavoring
if desired and strain into pitcher or glass sauce dish; serve cold.

Or, pour hot milk slowly stirring, over beaten eggs and sugar, strain
and pour into buttered custard cups, set in pan of hot water, bake
slowly until creamy all through, or till a silver knife will come out
clean when run into custard. Do not allow the water around the cups
to boil at any time. Cool as rapidly as possible. The straining of
custards has much to do with their smoothness and lightness. If the
boiled custard should curdle from too long cooking, beating with the
dish in cold water may restore the smoothness, but not the flavor.

In making a large quantity of custard, set as soon as creamy into cold
water and stir until below the coagulating point or the custard will
become curdled by its own heat.

=Custard of Yolks of Eggs=

    1 pt. milk
    2 tablespns. sugar
    yolks of 3 eggs

Follow directions for boiled custard. The custard may be served with
an uncooked meringue of the whites of the eggs, sprinkled with chopped
candied cherries or dotted with jelly.

=★ White Custard=

The white of 1 egg with ⅔ to 1 tablespn. of sugar and a trifle of salt,
to every ⅔ or 1 cup of milk. (Good with either quantity of milk.) Bake
in pan of hot water in very slow oven for 40 m. to 1 hour, according to
heat of oven and shape and size of dish.

=Corn Starch Custard=

    1 qt. milk
    4 tablespns. sugar
    1½ tablespn. corn starch
    1 egg
    salt

Blend corn starch with a little of the cold milk and pour slowly into
remainder of milk heated to boiling with the sugar; boil up well, or
cook in double boiler 10 m., add a little to the beaten egg, and when
smooth, turn egg all at once into hot mixture; stir well, remove from
fire, add salt and flavoring and strain.

=Cocoanut Banana Dessert=

Add grated cocoanut to corn starch custard. Fill deep glass dish with
layers of custard and bananas, and sprinkle cocoanut over the top.
Serve cold.

=Lemon Water Custard=

    4 or 5 tablespns. lemon juice
      with water to make 1 cup
    ½ cup sugar
    2 whole eggs and 1 yolk
    salt

Beat eggs and sugar together, pour hot lemon juice over, stirring;
cook, strain, turn into dish or glasses. Just before serving drop on
sweetened beaten white of egg and dot with squares or diamonds of jelly.

=Coffee Custard=

    1 cup cereal coffee
    1 level tablespn. sugar
    2 eggs
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Steep 2 tablespns. cocoanut in coffee and strain out if convenient.
Boil or bake. Serve with whipped cream.

=★ Floating Island=

    1 qt. milk
    3 eggs
    4 or 5 tablespns. sugar
    flavoring

Beat whites of eggs stiff with half the sugar, flavor, drop by
spoonsfuls on to hot (not boiling) milk; when puffed a little, turn
with silver fork, remove with skimmer or wire spoon when well heated
through. Turn milk into double boiler, add yolks and sugar, cook,
strain, cool. When cold, flavor and turn into large dish or several
glasses; lay puffs on top and dot with jelly or some confection,
or sprinkle with chopped candied cherries. A few fresh rose leaves
scattered over are not unsuitable.

=★ Floating Island No. 2=

    1 pt. milk
    3 eggs
    ¼ cup sugar
    ½ glass jam or jelly

Make boiled custard of yolks, sugar and milk; when cold, flavor or not
and turn into glass dish. Beat whites of eggs to stiff froth and beat
in any desired jam or jelly. Beat until very firm, drop on to custard.
Serve with cake or wafers.

Raspberry jelly or jam with 1 tablespn. currant jelly makes a nice
combination for flavor. The dish may be lined with lady fingers or
slices of sponge cake before custard is poured in. Water may be used
instead of milk for the custard.

=Custard Apple Pudding--Good Sabbath Dessert=

Cook without paring 3 medium sized apples in as little water as
possible; press through sieve, add 2 tablespns. butter, ¼-½ cup sugar
and the yolks of 3 eggs beaten with ¼ cup sugar, with 1 pt. of milk and
½ teaspn. of vanilla or a few drops of lemon extract; bake in moderate
oven until creamy, cover with meringue of whites of eggs beaten with 1
tablespn. of sugar; dust with powdered or granulated sugar and brown
delicately. Serve cold.

=Orange Pudding=

    1 qt. milk
    1 cup sugar
    4 level tablespns. corn starch
    2 or 3 eggs
    4 large oranges
    salt
    1 tablespn. powdered sugar

Heat ¾ of milk with ⅓ of sugar to boiling and stir in slowly corn
starch which has been blended with the remaining cup of milk, boil up
well and cook in double boiler for 10 m., then add yolks of eggs which
have been beaten with ⅓ the cup of sugar; when well heated through,
remove from fire and cool. Grate rind from one orange and mix with
a little of the remaining sugar; prepare orange pulp according to
directions on p. 42, and put into glass dish or individual glasses
and sprinkle with remaining sugar; when custard is cold turn it over
the oranges, and just the last thing before serving sprinkle the peel
over the custard and pile on it in spoonfuls (or put on with pastry
tube) the whites of the eggs beaten stiff with a speck of salt and the
powdered sugar; Serve at once.

Sprinkle meringue with cocoanut sometimes, or decorate with leaves of
angelica or diamonds of citron. The custard may be delicately flavored
with vanilla. Other fruits may be used.

=Banana Pudding=

Same as orange pudding, using 3 tablespns. cornstarch only. Pour
unflavored custard over sliced bananas warm, so that the custard will
be flavored with the banana.

=Hattie’s Prune Dessert=

Stew 1 lb. nice large California prunes in as little water as possible;
drain, remove the stones and chop the prunes, not too fine. Beat the
whites of 3 eggs to a stiff froth with a little salt and ¼ cup of
sugar. (Be sure to use the sugar in the eggs instead of in the prunes.)
Chop prunes in lightly, bake in pudding dish or brick shaped granite
pan in slow oven until egg is set, about 20 m. Serve cold with plain or
whipped cream. Almond cream flavored with vanilla is nice.

=Prune Soufflé=

Stew 28 prunes in as little water as possible; drain, rub through
colander. Add the whites of 4 eggs stiffly-beaten with 4 to 6
tablespns. sugar, set in pan of water, bake slowly until set. Serve
with egg cream or custard sauce or whipped cream.

=Fruit Whips=

=Dried Apple=--2 cups sifted, stewed, dried apples (stewed in small
quantity of water), ½-1 cup sugar, 1 tablespn. lemon juice if 1 cup of
sugar is used, whites of 2-4 eggs. Beat all together until light and
spongy, heap in glass dish. Serve cold with or without custard sauce
or cream. Dried peaches, apricots and prunes may be used the same.

Use only 2 tablespns. of sugar for each cup of prunes.

=Banana=--White of 1 egg, ¼ cup sugar, 1 teaspn. lemon juice, 1 cup
banana pulp. Nice on cake.

=Cranberry=--½ cup thick, sweetened, cooked pulp to white of 1 egg.

Whips must be beaten until they hold their shape. They are nice served
on bread puddings, custards and other desserts, instead of a meringue
or a sauce.

The rule for fruit whips is, 1 cup of fresh or stewed fruit pulp to the
white of each egg, sugar to suit the fruit, and a little lemon juice
with sweet fruits; but the proportion of fruit often needs to be varied.

Fresh pears and peaches may be used by rubbing through the colander or
mashing well.

=★ Jelly Whips, or Mary’s Desserts=

Quince--1 glass of quince jelly, whites of 3 eggs; beat jelly a little,
and whites very stiff and dry; combine the two and beat together until
stiff. Make custard of 1 pt. of milk, yolks of 3 eggs, 2 tablespns.
sugar; when cold put into glasses with whip on top. Sterilized cream
may be used instead of custard, or whip may be put into glass first and
whipped cream piled on top of that. Serve with crackers or cake.

Other jellies may be used the same.

=Brother Fulton’s Strawberry Fluff=

    whites 2 eggs
    ¾ cup sugar
    1 pt. strawberries

Mash berries with sugar and add to unbeaten whites in deep cake bowl;
beat with egg or batter whip until the mixture will stand alone, very
light and fluffy. Serve in glasses with cake or wafers, or as meringue,
garnish, or sauce for other desserts. Strawberry fluff makes a nice
garnish for strawberry shortcake. Raspberries and other fruits may be
used.

=Strawberries and Cream Whip=

    1 pt. ice cold cream
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ cup mashed fresh strawberries

Add sugar and berries to cream, whip as for whipped cream and serve in
sherbet glasses.

=Apple Cream=

Pare, quarter, core and steam 12 tart apples, rub through colander,
cool, add 1 cup sugar and whites of 2 eggs, beat until white and foamy;
heap in cold glass dish. Garnish with chopped candied cherries, bits of
jelly or with citron or angelica. Serve very cold.

=Rose Apple Cream=

Steam red skinned apples without paring for above recipe. Pile on glass
dessert plate and surround with whipped cream roses flavored delicately
with extract of rose.

=Lemon Snow Pudding=

    2-2¼ tablespns. lemon juice
    1 cup water
    1¼ tablespn. corn starch
    ½ cup sugar
    white of 1 egg

Heat sugar and water to boiling, stir in the corn starch blended with
water, boil up, add lemon juice and pour gradually, beating, over the
stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Beat well and pour into molds or cups,
cool. Serve with custard or red sauce or cream.

Pudding may be garnished with halves of candied cherries.

=Birds’ Nest Pudding=

Pare and core 6 or 8 tart apples. Steam until nearly tender. Set in
oiled pudding dish and cover with the following

  _Crust_--

    1 pt. milk
    2 tablespns. butter or oil
    4 tablespns. flour
    4 eggs

Cream butter and flour, pour boiling milk over, cook 5 m.; remove from
fire and add yolks of eggs. When cold, chop in the stiffly-beaten
whites of the eggs, turn over apples and bake in a slow or moderate
oven about ½ hour or until done. The success of the pudding depends
upon the slow baking. Serve at once with hard, creamy or any suitable
sauce, or with sweetened sterilized cream. Do not sweeten the apples or
batter. With some flours and some measurements, ½-1 tablespn. more of
flour will be required.

=Sponge Apple Pudding=

Fill pudding dish half full of quartered sour apples that have been
steamed until tender. Fill dish with a sponge cake batter and bake
until well done. Serve with custard, almond, cream or other sauce. May
use peaches sprinkled with sugar instead of apples, with thin meringue
on cake and no sauce.

=Lemon Soufflé Pudding--Unequaled=

    ¼ cup butter
    ½ cup flour
    1½ cup milk
    grated rind of 1 lemon
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    3 eggs
    ¼ cup sugar
    salt

Cream butter and flour and pour the boiling milk over; cook until
thick; add lemon juice and rind and yolks of eggs beaten with the
sugar; cool a little, chop in whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth
with salt; bake in buttered mold in pan of water in moderate oven until
egg is set, about 30 m. Serve with foamy or fruit Sabayon sauce, fruit
syrup or egg cream sauce.--_Boston Cooking School Magazine._

=Cream Sponge Pudding=

    4-5 tablespns. corn starch (according to quality)
    1 qt. milk
    2 eggs
    ½ cup sugar or none
    salt

Thicken boiling milk and sugar (if used) with corn starch stirred
smooth with some of the cold milk, boil 3-5 m.; add beaten yolks of
eggs, beat well and pour over stiffly-beaten whites, turn into wet
molds or cups. Serve with fruit or other sauce if not sweetened, or if
sweet with cream.

=Fruit Juice Mold=

    1 cup rich fruit juice
    1 cup water
    sugar
    salt
    4 level tablespns. corn starch
    whites of 2-3 eggs

Heat juice, sugar, salt and water to boiling; stir in corn starch
blended with cold water; boil well, pour over stiff whites of eggs,
beating; mold. Serve with custard or whipped cream flavored with
strawberry, orange, lemon or vanilla or not flavored at all, as
suitable.

=Snow Blanc Mange--No Milk=

    1 pt. boiling water
    6 level tablespns. corn starch
    ¼ cup cold water
    ⅞ cup sugar
    whites 3 or 4 eggs
    ½-¾ teaspn. vanilla with or without a few drops almond extract

Thicken boiling water and sugar with corn starch blended with cold
water; boil well, pour over the stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs,
beating, add flavoring and turn into wet mold. Serve with custard of
yolks of eggs flavored with vanilla or a few drops of lemon extract.

Blanc Mange may be garnished with small dice or diamonds of citron.

=Flour Blanc Mange=

    1 pt. milk
    2 tablespns. flour
    1 egg
    salt

Stir flour blended with part of the milk into remainder of milk when
boiling; cook 10-20 m. in double boiler; add egg slightly beaten, heat
a moment and turn into cups dipped in cold water; serve cold with any
desired dressing. In making a larger quantity, use a slightly larger
proportion of flour.

=Rice Flour Pudding=

    4 tablespns. rice flour
    1 cup cold milk
    1 qt. boiling milk
    1 tablespn. butter
    2 eggs
    ¾-1 cup sugar
    flavoring
    salt

Add sugar to boiling milk and stir in the flour blended with the cold
milk; boil 5 m.; add butter, beaten eggs and salt; bake 20 m. or until
firm. Serve with strawberry or blueberry sauce or with cream. Butter
may be omitted.

=Corn Starch Meringue=

    1 qt. milk
    2 tablespns. corn starch
    6 tablespns. sugar
    3 eggs
    flavoring

Heat milk and 4 tablespns. of sugar to boiling; stir in corn starch
blended with cold milk; boil; add the yolks of eggs, flavor, turn
into serving dish; cover at once with whites of eggs beaten with 2
tablespns. of sugar; tint delicately on top grate of oven. Serve cold.
The meringue may be sprinkled with grated cocoanut while warm. May use
1 tablespn. more of corn starch and lay drained canned peaches on top
of pudding before putting on meringue. Other fruits, jellies or jams
may be used.

=Sea Foam--Sea Moss=

Pour hot Irish Moss Blanc Mange, p. 308, over stiffly-beaten whites of
eggs. Flavor with almond, orange flower water or other flavoring. Mold.
Serve with anything suitable for Irish Moss Blanc Mange.

=Eva’s Tapioca Cream--none better=

    4 tablespns. minute, pearl or flake tapioca
        (3 only of cassava or manioca)
    1 scant cup of warm water
    1 qt. milk
    1 cup sugar
    3 eggs
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    salt

Soak tapioca in water (pearl or flake 2 hrs., minute or manioca 10 m.)
and cook with milk and sugar in double boiler until transparent; add
beaten yolks, stir for a moment, remove from fire, add vanilla and
pour into serving dish, cover with the whites of eggs beaten with 1-1½
tablespn. sugar. Tint on top grate of oven. Serve cold.

=Tapioca Cream--in glasses=

    2 tablespns. tapioca
    scant cup water
    1 qt. milk
    3 eggs
    ½-1 cup sugar
    flavoring
    salt

Soak tapioca in water, cook in the milk with half the sugar in double
boiler until clear; add beaten yolks of eggs, remove from fire and
while hot or when nearly cold pour over whites which have been beaten
with the remaining sugar; flavor and serve in glasses.

Beaten whites may be chopped into cold custard just before serving, or,
they may be served on top of it.

=Water Tapioca Pudding--Excellent=

    6 tablespns. tapioca
    5 cups water
    4 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    flavoring

Soak tapioca in 1 cup of the water, cook in remainder with sugar until
transparent, add beaten yolks (it is better to reserve a spoonful of
sugar to beat with the yolks), flavor and pour into pudding dish.
Meringue with whites of eggs beaten with 1-2 tablespns. of sugar,
flavored or not. Lemon juice or other fruit juices may replace some of
the water for variety. Stewed or steamed raisins may be sprinkled over
the pudding before the meringue is put on, but the plain pudding is
good enough.

=Molded Tapioca Pudding--Fine=

    ½ cup minute tapioca
    2 cups milk
    1-1⅓ cup water
    ½ cup sugar
    2 eggs
    a few drops of lemon extract
    ¾ teaspn. vanilla

Pour a good quantity of warm water over tapioca, soak 10 m., drain
and put to cooking with milk, water and sugar; cook until perfectly
transparent, stir in beaten yolks of eggs, remove from fire, add
flavoring, chop in the whites of eggs beaten with 1 tablespn. of sugar;
turn into wet mold or cups. Serve plain, garnished with nuts or jelly,
or with nut or dairy cream, custard, or some fruit whip or egg cream.

=★ Cottage Pudding--Eggs=

Take 1 egg and ½ cup of sugar to each cup of milk in universal crust.
Bake in any desired shape and serve with lemon or other sauce.

The sugar may be omitted for some sauces. A different pudding may be
made by steaming instead of baking.

=Steamed Fruit Pudding=

To ingredients for universal crust add 1 or 2 tablespns. of sugar
(white or brown) and 1 or 2 eggs for each cup of liquid--milk or water,
and flour for a thick batter. When light, mix in carefully floured
fresh blueberries, blackberries, raspberries, cranberries, cherries
or sliced peaches; dried blueberries, cherries, raisins or currants;
or drained canned cherries. Steam in well oiled molds or cups--cups ¾
hour, mold 1 hour. Serve with sauce suitable for the fruit.

The batter for Washington cake may be used sometimes.

=★ Quaker Pudding=

    6 eggs
    9 or 10 tablespns. pastry flour
    1 qt. milk

Beat all together. Bake in moderate oven. Serve with sauce.

=Batter Pudding=

    4 eggs
    1½ cup sifted flour
    salt
    1 pt. milk

Beat eggs for 3 m.; add the milk and pour on to flour gradually,
beating. Turn into well oiled mold with cover and steam or boil 1½ hr.
Serve with suitable sauce.

=Cocoanut Rice Pudding=

    3 pts. milk
    ⅓ cup rice
    1 cup sugar
    4 eggs
    1½ cup grated cocoanut
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    salt

Cook rice in milk until very soft, cool; beat 2 whole eggs and the
yolks of the other 2 with the sugar, cocoanut and salt and add with
the vanilla to the rice. Turn into pudding dish and bake in moderate
oven until eggs are set. Cover with a meringue of the remaining whites
of eggs and 1 or 2 tablespns. of sugar. Tint delicately in oven. Serve
warm or cold.

Grind desiccated cocoanut when using that instead of fresh. 1-1¼ cup
of cold boiled rice may be used. Vanilla maybe omitted.

=Rice Custard Pudding=

Same as above with cocoanut omitted. 1 cup of raisins, whole or
chopped, may be cooked with the rice sometimes.

=Rice Pudding--Lemon Meringue=

    1 cup boiled rice
    1 good pt. of milk
    2 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    2-2½ tablespns. lemon juice

Pour hot milk over rice in pudding dish. Beat yolks of eggs with ⅓ of
the sugar flavored with oil of lemon, as on p. 27, and add to rice
and milk. Bake in slow oven until creamy; beat whites of eggs stiff,
add sugar and lemon juice, drop by spoonfuls on pudding and brown
delicately.

=Sweet Potato Mold=

    2 lbs. potatoes
    ½ cup butter
    ½ cup sugar
    5 eggs
    flavoring
    1 pt. thin cream

Boil and mash potatoes, add butter while warm, beat well; beat eggs
with sugar and add to mixture; then flavoring, Vanilla or lemon, and
cream. Bake in pudding mold in moderate oven. Serve with sauce or cream.

=Dainty Dessert=

Bake rose flavored sponge cake in flat pan, cut in squares and serve
with Imperial Raspberry Cream, p. 307.

=Cottage Cheese and Cake=

Spread creamy, unseasoned, sweetened cottage cheese over sponge cake,
cut into squares and serve with whipped cream. Molasses or Washington
cake may be used.

=Molasses Cake with Whipped Cream=

Serve fresh, warm, molasses cake with sweetened whipped cream flavored
with vanilla.

=Molded Apples=

Grind (not too fine) tart apples, put at once into boiling syrup of
equal quantities of sugar and water, just enough to cook apples and
leave dry. Do not stir. When thick, turn into mold to cool; unmold and
serve with boiled custard or with unsweetened whipped cream.

=Apple Dessert=

Stew nice, tart apples in quarters, in just enough water without sugar
to cook them, or, steam them; serve cold with plain sweetened egg cream
or boiled custard. Apples may be pared, cored and steamed.




PUDDING SAUCES


“The pudding is nice and the sauce is nice, but the tart of the lemon
destroys the flavor of the fig,” was the kindly criticism which my fig
pudding with lemon sauce received from one of the ladies of the class
in the junior days of my public work.

To combine desserts and sauces properly requires true artistic skill.
As a rule, a rich sauce should be served with a plain pudding and a
simpler or neutral sauce with a richer pudding, or with one having a
characteristic or delicate flavor. Cream--almond, Brazil nut, cocoanut
or dairy is the only thing that will develop the flavor of some
desserts, while some puddings are too good to be spoiled with any sauce.

=★ Creamy (Apple Dumpling) Sauce=

    ½ cup butter
    1 cup sugar
    ½ cup milk
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Cream butter and sugar, add milk gradually, stirring; set over hot
water and stir until just smooth, no longer. The sauce is not intended
to be hot. Add vanilla and serve at once.

If the sauce should stand and separate, heat carefully again before
serving. Water may be used in place of milk, or lemon juice and water
in equal quantities, with lemon flavor, or fruit juices for cottage or
plain steamed puddings. Orange juice with the flavor of the rind and
vanilla makes a pleasing combination. The sauce is sometimes made with
cream and sometimes with ¼ cup each of cream and fruit juice.

=Strawberry or Raspberry Sauce=

Add 1 cup mashed, drained, canned or fresh strawberries or raspberries
to above sauce just before serving.

=★ Foamy Sauce=

    ½ cup butter
    1 cup sugar
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    2 tablespns. fruit juice
    ¼ cup boiling water
    white of 1 egg

Cream butter and sugar, add vanilla and fruit juice. Just before
serving, add gradually the boiling water, and pour over the
stiffly-beaten white of egg; beat until foamy. Vanilla may be omitted.
Grape juice gives a lavender color.

=Hard Sauce=

    ¼ cup butter
    1 cup sugar, powdered or granulated
    flavoring

Cream butter, add sugar gradually. When sauce is smooth and creamy, add
flavoring. Pile on glass or other pretty dish, set in cold place to
harden.

=Variations of Hard Sauce=

_a._ Flavor with fine ground coriander seed, or very delicately with
powdered anise seed.

_b._ Beat 1 tablespn. cream with butter and sugar.

_c._ Add unbeaten white of 1 egg and beat 5 m. more.

_d._ Add unbeaten yolk of egg and beat.

_e._ Add 1 egg, yolk and white beaten separately.

_f._ Add gradually 1 or 2 stiffly-beaten whites of eggs, beat till
frothy.

_g._ Add 2 tablespns. boiling water.

_h._ Flavor sugar with oil of lemon and add 1-1¼ tablespn. lemon juice.

_i._ Add 2 tablespns. raspberry, grape or any desired fruit juice,
sauce or jelly.

_j._ Add 2 tablespns. any fruit juice and ½ tablespn. lemon juice.

_k._ Flavor sugar with oil of orange, add 2 tablespns. orange juice and
½-1 teaspn. vanilla.

_l._ Add 2 tablespns. very strong cereal coffee with 1 teaspn. vanilla.

_m._ Add 1 cup fine grated cocoanut and if desired, 2 eggs, whites and
yolks beaten separately.

_n._ Add ¼-½ tablespn. lemon juice, and one at a time, beating well, 10
or 12 large ripe strawberries.

_o._ Add 1 egg and beat; beat in 1 cup fresh crushed ripe
strawberries--Annie’s sauce.

_p._ Use raspberries in place of strawberries in “_o._”

_q._ Add ½ cup cream, whipped to either “_o._” or “_p._”

_r._ Add fine ground dates or steamed figs.

_s._ Use 1 cup fine rolled maple sugar instead of white, with or
without beaten white of 1 or 2 eggs.

=★ Variegated Hard Sauce=

    ¼-½ cup butter
    1 cup sugar
    white of 1 egg
    yolk of 1 egg
    pink fruit color

Cream butter and sugar, add beaten white of egg, divide into 3 parts,
flavor one part with vanilla, add yolk of egg to another with 2 or 3
drops of lemon extract and put the fruit color with a drop or two of
rose into the third part; oil a brick shaped mold and press the sauce
into it in layers, set in a cold place to harden. When firm, dip mold
quickly into hot water, turn sauce on a platter or flat dish and let
stand in a cold place until the outside is again hardened. Cut in
slices with hot knife and lay a slice on each serving of pudding.

Saffron may be used to color yellow, green and other colors may be
used, and strawberry flavoring instead of rose sometimes. Maple hard
sauce might be used for one layer.

=Hard Sauce of Cooking Oil=

    ¼-½ cup oil
    1 cup sugar
    salt
    1 white of egg
    flavoring

Beat oil sugar and salt together until light and creamy; add flavoring
and stiffly-beaten white of egg, set in cool place to harden.

Soft or melted cocoanut butter may be used the same.

=Plain Lemon Sauce=

    1 cup water
    ¾-1 cup sugar flavored with oil of lemon
    2½-3 tablespns. lemon juice
    ¾-1 tablespn. corn starch

Heat sugar and water to boiling, add corn starch blended with cold
water, boil, remove from fire, add lemon juice and a trifle of salt.

=Lemon Sauce--Egg=

    1 cup water
    ½-⅔ cup sugar flavored with oil of lemon
    ⅔-1 tablespn. corn starch
    yolk of 1 egg
    1½-2 tablespns. lemon juice
    a trifle of salt

Boil sugar and water, thicken with corn starch blended with water,
boil, add yolk, stir well but do not boil; add lemon juice and salt.
One yolk is sufficient for twice the quantity of sauce.

=Starchless Lemon Sauce=

    ¾ cup sugar flavored with oil of lemon
    yolks of 2 eggs and white of 1
    2-3 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 cup water

Beat sugar, eggs and lemon juice together; add hot, not boiling, water
gradually, cook stirring in double boiler till creamy. Set at once into
cold water. Add a trifle of salt.

=Cream Lemon Sauce=

Add, beating well, 2-4 tablespns. of cream--sweet or sour, to each cup
of liquid in any of the recipes for lemon sauce. When sweet cream is
used it may be cooked with the other ingredients.

=Orange Sauce=

The same as lemon sauce with egg, using 4 tablespns. orange and ½
tablespn. lemon juice with a scant cup of water. Add cream for Cream
Orange Sauce.

=★ Orange Syrup Sauce=

Flavor 1 cup of granulated sugar with the lightly scored rind of 4 or 5
oranges, add the juice of the oranges (1 cupful) and let the syrup just
boil up; strain and add a trifle of salt. For plum pudding add also ½-1
teaspn. vanilla.

=Lemon Raisin Sauce=

    1 cup molasses
    1 cup hot water
    2-2½ tablespns. lemon juice, grated rind if desired
    1 cup chopped seeded raisins
    2 tablespns. butter
    1 tablespn. corn starch
    a little milk

Cook raisins 20 m.; drain and measure the water for the sauce. Mix
molasses, water and raisins and heat to boiling; stir in corn starch
blended with milk; boil up well, add butter and lemon juice and serve.

=Raisin Sauce=

    ½ cup sugar
    1 pound seedless raisins

Stew raisins ½ hr. or until tender, add sugar and cook to a thin syrup.
Serve over boiled rice with cream. If desired, nut or dairy cream or
butter may be added to the sauce.

=Fig Sauce=

Grind figs fine through food cutter, simmer in small quantity of water
½ hr. or until soft, add a little sugar and simmer again, leave just a
little liquid. Nut or dairy cream or butter may be added, or the cereal
or dessert may be served with both fig sauce and cream.

=Date Sauce=

Stew dates 10 m. in small quantity of water, rub through colander;
serve rather thick. The date may be flavored delicately with anise.

Cream, with vanilla, lemon, rose or almond flavor, coriander or anise
may be added to the date pulp.

=Prune Sauce=

Rich prune juice is nice with blanc mange, cottage pudding and similar
desserts. Stewed prunes may be rubbed through the colander and their
juice added for sauce, with or without orange or vanilla flavoring. The
thick pulp may be added to whipped cream, a little at a time, beating,
for Prune Whipped Cream Sauce.

=Peach Sauce=

Mix ¼ cup sugar and a level tablespn. corn starch. Pour on gradually 1
cup boiling water; boil 5 m., stirring; add 1 tablespn. lemon juice, 1
of butter and a cup of peaches which have been pared, mashed and rubbed
through a fine sieve; bring just to boiling point and serve.

Nice with cottage pudding and popovers. Canned or dried peaches may
be used with the thin juice of the peach instead of water; then no
additional sugar will be required.

=Pineapple Sauce=

Beat whites of 2 eggs, add powdered sugar till creamy; then add 3
tablespns. cream and 1 cup grated pineapple; serve with Irish moss or
gelatine blanc mange.

=Cranberry Sauce=

Boil ½-¾ cup sugar and ½ cup water 5 m., add 1 cup cranberry juice and
boil again. Thicken with 1 teaspn. corn starch, add a few drops lemon
extract and 1 teaspn. melted butter. Strawberry or rose extract may be
used instead of lemon.

=Fruit Sabayon Sauce=

    ½ cup grape, black raspberry or other fruit juice
    ¼-½ cup sugar
    1 teaspn. lemon juice
    1 egg
    ⅓-½ cup sugar

Heat juice, the first sugar and lemon juice nearly to boiling; pour,
stirring, over egg (in double boiler) which has been beaten with the
last sugar. Cook, stirring, a moment or two, to just thicken but not to
curdle the egg; serve hot or beat until cold. ¼ cup cream--whipped, may
be added.

=★ Jelly Meringue Sauce=

Beat white of egg stiff, then beat in gradually any desired jelly. 1-1½
tablespn. powdered sugar may be added to the egg before the jelly, and
2 tablespns. cream, plain or whipped. This sauce will keep on ice for
several hours.

=Cream, White, and Foamy White Sauces=

  =Cream=--

    1½ cup water
    ½ cup sugar
    ½ cup cream
    1 tablespn. flour
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    salt

Mix flour and sugar, pour boiling water over stirring, boil up well,
add cream and a trifle of salt, remove from fire and stir in vanilla.
For pineapple sago or tapioca, flavor sauce delicately with rose.

=White=--Use milk in place of water. Serve plain, or flavor with
orange, almond or lemon, and vanilla.

2 tablespns. of butter or the yolk of an egg may be used with a half
cup more of milk instead of the ½ cup of cream.

=Foamy White=--Pour hot white sauce slowly, stirring, over whites of 2
eggs, stiffly-beaten with half the sugar.

=Cocoanut Sauce=

Steep, not boil, 2 tablespns. cocoanut in 1 pt. of milk for 20 m.,
strain and use milk in white or foamy white sauce.

=Banana Cream Sauce=

Heat cream and sugar nearly to boiling in double boiler. Remove from
fire, add fine diced bananas and serve at once. A little vanilla may
be added. Serve over popovers, molded farina, rice or plain tapioca
pudding.

=Cold Cream Sauce=

    1 egg
    ½ cup sugar, granulated or powdered
    ½ cup cream
    ⅓ cup milk
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Put ingredients all together and beat until thick as whipped cream.

=Whipped Cream Sauce=

    1 cup cream
    ½ cup sugar
    ½-1 teaspn. vanilla
    white of 1 egg

Whip cream until quite stiff, add sugar and vanilla, finish whipping,
chop in stiffly-beaten white of egg. May beat fresh fruit or fruit
jelly into white before adding to cream.

=Strawberry Cream Sauce=

    ½ pt. cream
    ½ cup sugar
    1½ cup mashed strawberries
    white of 1 egg

Whip cream, add half the sugar, berries, and white of egg
stiffly-beaten with remainder of sugar.

=Creamy Sauce of Cooking Oil=

    ½ cup cooking oil
    ¼ cup cream
    ½ cup sugar flavored with oil of lemon
    2-2½ tablespns. lemon juice

Beat the oil and sugar to a thick cream; when very light add cream a
little at a time, stir over boiling water if necessary to make the
sauce smooth and creamy, add lemon and serve.

=Lemon Cream Sauce--Sour Cream=

    1 pt. sour cream
    2½ tablespns. lemon juice
    ¾-1 cup sugar flavored with oil of lemon

Beat all together until very light.

=Sauce Antique--Sour Cream=

    1 cup sour cream
    ¼-⅓ cup sugar
    a few drops almond extract
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Beat cream and sugar together until light and add flavoring.

=Egg Cream or Emergency Sauce=

    2 eggs
    ⅓ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. cream
    ½ teaspn. vanilla or a few drops lemon extract
        or 1 or 2 drops of rose

Beat whites stiff with a trifle of salt, add sugar, beat until smooth;
chop in lightly, yolks, cream and flavoring. Do not let stand. Nice for
plum and other puddings.

=Orange Egg Cream Sauce=

    2 eggs
    ⅓ cup sugar
    4 tablespns. orange juice
    ¼ cup cream

Beat whites of eggs stiff, add orange flavored sugar, or use grated
rind of orange, beat; then chop in yolks, orange juice and whipped
cream.

Nice for fig, apple tapioca and other puddings.

=Almond Cream Sauce=

    2 tablespns. almond butter
    3-4 tablespns. sugar
    1¼-1½ cup boiling water
    salt
    1 tablespn. orange flower water or a few drops of almond extract
    with or without ⅓ teaspn. vanilla

Blend butter, sugar and salt; add water slowly, boil up well, remove
from fire and add flavoring. Serve hot or cold. 1 teaspn. flour and a
little more water may be used.

=Grape and Almond Sauce=

    2 level tablespns. almond butter
    ⅔ cup rich grape juice
    2 tablespns. sugar
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    ½ cup water

Blend almond butter and water, add sugar, bring to boiling point,
remove from fire and add lemon and grape juice.

The sauce may be made thinner.

=Almond Whipped Cream=

Rub 2 tablespns. almond butter smooth with 3 tablespns. water and chop
lightly into the white of an egg that has been beaten to a stiff froth
with 1 tablespn. of sugar.

=Almond Cream for Puddings or Cereals=

    2 teaspns. flour
    1 cup water
    2 tablespns. almond butter
    little salt
    ¾ cup distilled water

Heat 1 cup of water to boiling and thicken with the flour blended with
cold water; rub almond butter smooth with salt and distilled water; add
the thickened water, beat well, serve cold.

=Custard Sauce=

    1 pt. milk
    yolk of 3 eggs
    2-3 tablespns. sugar
    ½ teaspn. vanilla, or a few drops of almond extract

Cook all together in inner cup of double boiler until mixture will coat
the back of a spoon. Remove at once from fire and set in pan of cold
water.

For plum pudding, the custard may be flavored with orange and vanilla.

=Maple Syrup Sauce=

Boil ½ cup maple syrup with ¼ cup water (or if syrup is thin, ¾ cup
syrup and no water) until it threads. Add gradually, beating, the
stiffly-beaten whites of 2 eggs and ½ cup cream.

For some desserts, add 1 teaspn. lemon juice.

=Maple Sugar Sauce=

½ lb. of grated maple sugar, 1 cup milk or thin cream, salt. Simmer
together a few minutes, stirring often.

=Molasses Sauces=

=Cream=--1 cup molasses, ½ cup cream. Whip cream, heat molasses and
pour over it, beating. Serve at once.

=Butter=--1 cup molasses, ¼ cup butter, boil 5 m.

=Lemon Juice=--

    1 cup molasses
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    1 tablespn. butter
    salt

Boil 10 m.

Molasses sauces are nice with rice, bread and puff omelets and steamed
or cottage puddings.

=★ Plain Pudding Sauce=

Rub to a cream ¼ cup butter (1 tablespn. would do) and 1 cup brown
or granulated sugar; add 1 tablespn. flour, pour on gradually 1¼ cup
boiling water; boil 5 m., stirring; flavor with vanilla, or add 1
tablespn. lemon juice.

=Rose Sauce=

Boil to a thin syrup 1 pt. of water and 1½ cup of sugar, add a very
little salt, a trifle of red fruit color and 1-3 drops of extract of
rose with or without 1 or 2 tablespns. of lemon juice.

Serve with snow pudding or blanc mange.

For =Red Sauce=, slice a rich red beet into the water, let stand 15-20
m. in a hot place without boiling, strain, add sugar and at the last,
lemon or vanilla flavoring or both, with lemon juice.




VEGETABLE GELATINE


In the seaweed, Agar Agar, which comes from the rocky coasts of the
East India islands, we have a most delightful vegetable gelatine.
Besides being clean and pure and sweet, it is inexpensive. An ounce of
Agar Agar will solidify from two to four times as much liquid as an
ounce of animal gelatine. The method of its use is very simple.


Directions

Pour water that feels quite hot to the finger over the gelatine and
let it stand covered in a warm place for an hour or longer. When ready
to use, drain and to the hot water drained off add sufficient boiling
water to make 4 cups (1 qt.) for each ounce of gelatine. Pour over
gelatine and cook (taking care that it does not boil over) in covered
vessel until clear, which will be in not over 2 or three minutes if the
gelatine was well soaked.

For fruit juices and nearly all liquids, 1 oz. is sufficient for
16 cups (4 qts.), including the water in which it was boiled. The
exceptions will be noted in the recipes. This proportion makes that
delicate, quaking jelly always so desirable.

In warm weather a little more gelatine may be required, and the
proportions vary slightly with different qualities of gelatine.


Secrets of Success

Keep cooked gelatine warm by setting dish in hot water (may be cooked
in inner cup of double boiler, then set into outer boiler) until ready
to use.

Leave molds quite wet. Set in cold room or on ice or in ice water.
When cold surroundings are not obtainable, use a smaller proportion of
liquid. Do not unmold until just before serving time.

If for any reason gelatine becomes solidified or partly so after
boiling, before molding, boil it up again as nothing less than boiling
heat will make it smooth.

When the gelatine is to be cooked in stock or milk, do not have water
for soaking quite so hot.

Unless a very transparent jelly is desired, straining after cooking is
unnecessary with a good quality of gelatine. The very cheapest quality
may require several strainings but I question the economy of its use.
Strain, if at all, through a double thickness of cheese cloth (wrung
out of hot water) into a hot vessel.

Pour cooked gelatine into liquid all at once, stir just enough to mix
well, and turn immediately into molds. Do not stir while cooling.

For freezing, use ⅓-½ less of gelatine and ⅓ more of sugar in recipes.

To unmold jelly, run a thin bladed knife around the edge carefully,
when necessary; turn the dish on which it is to be served over it and
invert quickly; shake gently. If the mold was not drained too much,
there will be no necessity for using a warm, wet cloth or warm water to
loosen jelly.

Use jellies with fresh pineapple the day they are prepared.

When whipped cream is used, add all or a part of the sugar to it before
mixing it with the other ingredients.

The whites of the eggs must be beaten with all or nearly all of the
sugar of the recipe to combine well.

If directions are followed carefully, vegetable gelatine desserts will
be found among the easiest to prepare, as well as very delightful.

The recipes are all for Agar Agar or gelatine in bulk.

In each recipe, the quantity of water in which the gelatine is to be
cooked immediately follows it.


Fruit Jellies

The simplest and most desirable of gelatine desserts are the molds
made of fruit juices, either of one variety alone, or of harmonious
combinations such as red raspberry and currant, strawberry and
currant, strawberry and pineapple, and grape and peach (¼ grape and ¾
peach). Cherry, cranberry, gooseberry, apricot and orange are among the
many juices suitable for jellies.

The fruit itself cut fine may sometimes be used in connection with the
juice, pineapple especially.

The addition of lemon juice gives character to nearly all fruits. Add
water and sugar to make not too rich.

Jellies may be served plain, with fruit juices, or with whipped cream
or custard; or with egg or whipped cream sauce.

When obtainable, the fruit and leaves of the fruit used in the jelly
make suitable decorations.

  _Proportions_--

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    3 cups fruit juice

The water is that in which the gelatine is to be cooked. Prepare the
juice, cook the gelatine (after soaking) and pour it, _all at once_,
into the juice. Stir just enough to mix well and pour into molds. This
quantity will make about 12 good sized individual molds.

=Delicate Lemon Jelly=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    ½ cup lemon juice
    large ¾ cup sugar
    2½ cups water

=Fruit and Mint Jelly=

Make delicate lemon jelly with 1 cup of sugar. Pour some of it into
the bottom of a mold, keeping the remainder hot. When cold, but hardly
beginning to set, drop small pieces of grape fruit pulp into it and
sprinkle with shredded fresh mint. Cover with more jelly. Next, place
a layer of slices of red skinned apples around the edge with another
sprinkling of mint. Have the next layer of green skinned apples, and
finally cover with jelly. Follow general directions for cooling and
unmolding. Other fruits may be used.

=Beets in Jelly=

Layers of sliced or diced boiled red beets may be molded with lemon
jelly with pleasing effect.

=Orange Jelly=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    ½ cup lemon juice
    1½ cup orange juice
    1 cup water flavored with rind of orange
    ½-⅔ cup of sugar

Heat sugar and water together until sugar is dissolved. The orange pulp
need not be strained out of the juice.

=Orange or Lemon Jelly with Strawberries=

Press ripe whole, or pieces of strawberries into jelly quickly when
just cold and beginning to set slightly. Serve with whipped cream
garnished with slices of berries. Red raspberries may be used instead
of strawberries.

=Jelly in Orange Cups=

Orange jelly with or without fruit may be molded in cups the size of
orange cups, transferred to them at serving time and finished with a
meringue or a fluff or with whipped cream.

=★ Wedding Breakfast Salad=

    ⅛ oz. gelatine
    ½ cup water
    ½ cup pineapple juice
    ⅓ cup lemon juice
    ⅔ cup water
    ⅔-1 cup sugar
    2 small oranges
    2-3 bananas
    1 cup very dry shredded pineapple

Heat the sugar and water together, remove from fire, add the lemon and
pineapple juice and gelatine; then the fruit which has been cut into
small pieces. Put into molds and set on ice. Use the day it is made.
Serve plain or with whipped cream.

I once saw this salad served with two orange cups tied together with
baby ribbon the color of the bride’s dress, having the whipped cream
piled in one cup and the jelly cut into cubes in the other.

Of course the jelly should be cut just before serving.

=Red Jelly with Fruit=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    scant 3 cups cranberry juice
    ¾-1 cup sugar
    4-6 drops lemon extract

Stew berries in an equal quantity of water and strain for juice. Pour
half of liquid into mold. Let it set slightly, keeping the remaining
half hot. Cover with shredded or cut fruit (oranges, bananas,
pineapple, well drained canned pears or peaches) and pour remainder
of liquid over. Allow jelly to become very firm. Serve with garnish
of whipped cream or rich meringue flavored with lemon or rose. Dark
red cherry and lemon juice make a most delightful jelly without the
flavorings.

=★ Orange Garnish for Salad or Cold Entrée=

Cut a small hole in one end of as many oranges as desired. Carefully
scoop out the pulp, leaving the rinds whole. Soak in cold water an hour
or more. Drain and wipe dry on the inside, then leave in cold place
until well dried.

Make a jelly in the proportion of--

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    1⅓ cup cranberry juice
    5 tablespns. lemon juice
    ⅔ cup sugar
    (or the same quantity of liquid, using cherry and lemon juice)

When nearly cold, carefully fill cups, harden, and at serving time cut
the oranges in sixths or eighths, rind and all.

Orange, lemon and other fruit jellies may be used by taking only 1¾ cup
of liquid besides the water in the gelatine.

=Apple Sauce Molds--very nice=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    4 cups pulp of steamed apples
    2½-3 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 tablespn. sugar

Serve with egg sauce, custard or whipped cream, or with blueberry or
grape juice.

=Orange Cream=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    ½ tablespn. lemon juice with orange juice to make ¾ of a cup
    2-3 tablespns. sugar
    ¾ cup cream, plain or whipped

Add lemon and orange juice to cooked gelatine, and sugar to cream,
then pour gelatine into cream, mixing carefully if cream is whipped.
Mold.

Pineapple may be used the same, or ⅔ pineapple and ⅓ orange juice.

=Prune Cream Mold=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    pulp of ½ lb. (24 medium sized) prunes
        with water enough to make 2-2½ cups
    ½ teaspn. vanilla
    1 cup cream, whipped
    2 tablespns. sugar

=Pineapple Sponge=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    1 cup cream, plain
    ½ teaspn. vanilla
    2 teaspns. lemon juice in cup, pineapple juice to fill the cup
    whites of 4 eggs
    ¾ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice

Beat whites of eggs stiff, add sugar and beat, chop in the lemon juice,
then the cream and the pineapple juice, carefully, and lastly add the
gelatine, not too warm, and put at once into molds. Some of the fruit
cut fine may be used with the juice.

=Lemon Snow=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    ⅔ cup lemon juice
    1⅓ cup water
    whites of 3 eggs
    1 cup sugar

Beat whites of eggs stiff, add the sugar, beating well, then the lemon
juice and water, slowly, chopping in lightly, then add the gelatine,
not very warm.

May serve with border of grated or shredded pineapple. Make pineapple,
gooseberry, grape and other fruit snows in the same way.

=Sponge Pudding=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    yolks 4 eggs
    4 tablespns. (⅓ cup) lemon juice
    5 tablespns. sugar
    whites 4 eggs
    6 tablespns. sugar

Beat yolks of eggs in inner cup of double boiler and pour slowly over
them the lemon juice and 5 tablespns. of sugar, hot, not boiling;
cook like custard, cool; chop into whites of eggs which have been
stiffly beaten with the 6 tablespns. of sugar, and add the gelatine,
not very warm. Serve with unflavored, whipped cream or with grape juice.

[Illustration:

    WEDDING BREAKFAST SALAD, P. 338
    GELATINE BLANC MANGE, P. 341]

[Illustration:

    ORANGE MINT SALAD, P. 291
    APPLE AND PINEAPPLE SALAD, P. 290]

=★ Gelatine Blanc Mange=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    4 cups rich milk
    3-4 tablespns. sugar
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Soak gelatine in warm water, drain and cook in part of the milk in
the inner cup of a double boiler (let stand in the outer boiler until
well heated, then boil carefully over the fire). When the gelatine is
dissolved, remove from the fire, add sugar, then the cold milk and
lastly, the vanilla. Mold. Serve with cream or any desired sauce.

=Cocoanut Blanc Mange=

Flavor milk with cocoanut and proceed as in gelatine blanc mange. Serve
with rich blueberry juice, or with cream or custard.

=★ Rice Charlotte=

    ⅛ oz. gelatine
    ½ cup water
    ¼ cup rice
    1½ cup milk
    2-2½ tablespns. sugar
    ½ cup cream
    flavoring

After boiling rice in salted water 20 m. to ½ hr. drain and cook in
milk in double boiler 1 hr. Add water to that drained from the rice to
make ½ cup, which add with sugar, flavoring and gelatine to rice when
partly cooled. Lastly, mix whipped cream in lightly and mold. Serve
alone or with cream, plain or whipped, with orange egg cream sauce or
fruit sauce and halves of nuts. When serving with fruit sauces omit
flavorings.

If desired richer, 1 cup only of milk may be used for cooking rice,
and 1 cup cream, whipped, added. A garnish of small molds of orange or
other fruit jelly around the charlotte is very pretty.

=★ Whipped Cream Jelly--Miss Hughes=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    1¼ cup cream
    ⅓-½ cup sugar

Whip cream, not too much, add sugar, then gelatine. Tint delicately
with pink or green when desired, and flavor with vanilla or rose
or both or with orange and vanilla sometimes; but as a rule, it is
preferred without flavoring. May be served with cake or wafers and
berries.

=★ Maple Cream=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    1⅓ cup maple syrup
    1⅓ cup cream

Add syrup to gelatine, then both to whipped cream. Mold and serve with
wafers.

=Jellied Café au Lait=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    2 cups milk in which 1½-2 tablespns. of cereal coffee
        have been steeped

Serve with plain or whipped sweetened cream, flavored with vanilla if
desired.

=Coffee Bavarian=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    3 cups strong cereal coffee
    1 cup milk
    ⅔ cup sugar
    4 eggs
    ½-1 teaspn. vanilla

Strain coffee through cloth, mix with milk, sugar and eggs; cook like
custard. Cool partly before adding vanilla; add gelatine and mold.
Serve with unsweetened cream with cake or wafers.

=Coffee Bavarian and Blanc Mange or Jellied Custard=

May be molded in layers and served with a sweetened and vanilla
flavored meringue or with whipped cream in roses.

=★ Jellied Custard=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    3 cups rich milk
    2 eggs
    4-6 tablespns. sugar

Cook custard, flavor if desired, add gelatine, mold. Serve with
blueberry, grape or any suitable fruit juice, or with unsweetened
cream, plain or whipped. Or, cook milk and yolks of eggs together,
cool, add gelatine, and pour into whites beaten with sugar, chopping
quickly together. Or, use ½ cup cream, whipped, instead of whites of
eggs and 2½ cups of milk only.

=Jellied Custard with Meringue=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    3 cups rich milk
    4 yolks of eggs
    4-6 tablespns. sugar
    flavoring

Cook custard and cool; add vanilla and gelatine, mold. Just before
serving, beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth with 2 or 3
tablespns. of sugar (powdered preferable). Add 1½-2½ tablespns. lemon
juice, and heap by spoonfuls around the base of the mold. Serve at
once. If preferred, 1 cup of milk may be used to cook the gelatine in
after soaking, instead of water.

=Marshmallow Pudding=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    whites 3 eggs
    ½-¾ cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Beat whites of eggs very stiff, add sugar gradually, beating, then
vanilla, lastly the warm gelatine, chopping in quickly. Mold in shallow
pan. Just before serving unmold and with hot, dry knife cut into cubes.
Serve with cream, custard or fruit juice or use as garnish for other
dishes.

=Cream of Tomato and Carrot Jelly=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    3 cups rich milk
    1 cup strained tomato
    2 teaspns. salt
    2 level teaspns. sugar
    ¾ cup carrot

Soak gelatine in warm water, drain, cook in milk; add the tomato,
sugar and salt with cooked carrot which has been rubbed through a
fine colander, mold. Serve garnished with spinach or chervil as a
cold entrée, with nuts and wafers. Or, mold in small molds and use as
a garnish for other dishes. May flavor milk with onion or onion and
garlic, straining them out after cooking gelatine.

=★ Tomato Jelly=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    2 tablespns. lemon juice with strained tomato to make 3 cups
    1-1½ tablespn. sugar
    3 tablespns. chopped onion
    ¾ teaspn. celery seed, crushed, or
    ¾ cup dried celery tops, or
    1 teaspn. celery salt
    2-2½ teaspns. salt
    1 tablespn. chopped parsley

Simmer all ingredients (except gelatine and parsley) together for
20 m., strain, add parsley and cooked gelatine and pour into mold.
Individual molds may be served on lettuce, spinach or endive with or
without improved mayonnaise dressing.

=★ Tomato Aspic=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    3 cups tomato juice
    1 tablespn. sugar
    2½ tablespns. lemon juice
    ¾-1 tablespn. salt
    ¾ teaspn. celery salt, tied in bit of muslin

Drain juice from stewed tomatoes without pressing the pulp through; add
other ingredients. Simmer all together 10-15 m.; strain, add water to
make 3 cups, mix with cooked gelatine and mold.

Green peas, sprays of parsley, sliced celery, or trumese or nutmese in
dice (singly or in combinations) may be put in with jelly, in layers,
the same as fruit, in fruit and mint jelly. Serve garnished as a cold
entrée for luncheon or for supper or for one course at dinner. Mold in
small molds sometimes and use as a garnish.

=Aspic--Light=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    2¾-3 cups light stock (tinted green if desired)

If preferred pour hot stock over 2 yolks of eggs and cook and add to
gelatine. May be molded in small molds for garnishing.

A mold of jellied bouillon or stock surrounded with halves of nuts or
delicate wafers or both, may be served in place of soup.

=Bouillon for Jelly=

    1½-2½ level tablespns. raw nut butter
    ⅔ cup chopped onion
    1 cup strained tomato
    2¼ level tablespns. browned flour
    2-3 cloves of garlic crushed
    1½ level tablespn. salt
    water

Mix browned flour, salt, nut butter and tomato, add water, onion and
garlic. Cook ½-1 hour and strain. Add water for 3 pts. If cleared (p.
77), there will be 1 qt. only. Use in proportion of 4 cups to the ¼ oz.
of gelatine.

=Light Stock for Jelly=

    ¼ cup raw nut butter
    1 cup chopped onion
    1 level tablespn. celery seed or salt
    ¾ level teaspn. sage
    2-2½ bay leaves
    1¼ level tablespn. salt
    ⅛ level teaspn. thyme
    water

Simmer ½-1 hour, strain and clear (p. 77). 3½-4 cups after clearing.
Use in proportion of 3¾ cups to the ¼ oz. of gelatine.

=Dark Stock for Jelly=

    ¼ cup raw nut butter or meal
    1 cup chopped onion
    3 cloves of garlic crushed
    ½ cup strained tomato
    1 level teaspn. celery salt
    ½ level teaspn. sage
    ⅛-¼ level teaspn. thyme
    1½ level tablespn. salt
    1 level tablespn. browned flour
    water

Mix dry ingredients, add tomato with nut butter which has been stirred
smooth with water, then onion, garlic and water. Cook ½-1 hour; strain
and add water for 3 pts. This may be used uncleared, but if cleared (p.
77) there will be 1 qt. only. Use in proportion of 4 cups to the ¼ oz.
of gelatine.

=Aspic for Garnishing=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    cleared bouillon with it to make 1 cup

Pour into shallow mold to desired depth. Unmold and cut with hot dry
knife into dice or fancy shapes just before serving.

=Jellied Broth--Dark=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup water
    1 qt. dark stock, uncleared

Mold in small cups and serve in soup plates or on small plates,
surrounded with soup crackers and halves of nuts with fringed celery.

=Gelatine of Trumese=

Cut trumese (some nutmese also if wished) into ½-¾ in. dice. Mold with
light aspic, using sprays of parsley and small button mushrooms if
wished.

May serve on a bed of green, with improved mayonnaise roses.

=Jellied Cream Trumese (Salad if Desired)=

    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1 cup broth--light stock without celery and bay leaves
    ¾-⅞ cup cream
    4-5 oz., (9 tablespns.--¾-1 cup) trumese
    salt if necessary

Add minced trumese to gelatine cooked in broth and when partly cooled,
chop into whipped cream. Mold in large or small molds. Mold may be
garnished with celery tops and served with wafers and stalks of celery,
or garnished with fringed celery or ripe olives and parsley, the celery
or olives with wafers to be served with mold.

Or, the one or individual molds may be served with improved or cream
mayonnaise dressing with ripe olives or celery and wafers.

=The Medical Use of Agar Agar=

Quite recently the use of agar agar as a remedy for constipation has
been discovered. “Life and Health” says: “Agar Agar, a vegetable
gelatine prepared from East Indian seaweeds, has been given an official
recommendation by the Council of Pharmacy as a remedy for constipation.”

One physician suggests cutting it into small pieces and eating it with
cream as a porridge. It may also be served with fruit juices and other
liquids.

The liquid should be poured over it a few minutes before serving, to
moisten it sufficiently for mastication. A druggist said, however, that
it might be chewed dry.




PIES


Pies are not necessarily unwholesome articles of diet. They may be just
good rich unleavened bread and fruit. Perhaps the greatest objection
to pies occasionally, is the length of time it takes to make them, for
paste that will make a tender crust cannot be rolled out in a hurry. It
is better to have something else for dessert when one has not time to
make a good pie.


Suggestions

Always use pastry flour (winter wheat) for pie crust. Bread flour
requires more shortening, creeps together when rolled and does not make
a nice, tender crust when you have done your best with it.

Always use pastry (never bread) flour for thickening cream or lemon
pies. If cream pies are not to be used the day they are baked less
flour will be required. Lemon pies should be used the day they are
baked.

Apple and all fruit pies require a little flour in the filling, for
the flavor as well as to absorb the juice. A little salt develops the
flavors of fruits. Mix the flour, sugar and salt together and put
enough of it over the under crust to cover it well in order to prevent
the crust from soaking and to allow the sugar to cook up through the
fruit.

Berry pies may have most of the sugar mixture stirred with them before
putting into the crust. A little browned flour may sometimes be added
to the mixture for apple pies.

Do not peel rhubarb for pies.

To keep the juice from running out, wet strips of pliable cloth 2 or
3 in. wide (bias better) and wrap around the edge of pies where the
crusts join, so that half is on the top crust and half under the edge,
and press close all around. Milk or hot or cold water may be used;
leave the strips quite wet; remove from pies while hot; they may be
used several times.

Another method is to make a small opening in the upper crust and insert
a little roll of paper, like a chimney, to allow the steam to escape.

It is a good plan, also, to put the upper crust on to the pie as loose
as possible; lift it and make wrinkles in it all around, back from the
edge of the pie, before pressing the two crusts together; this will
keep the steam and juice in the pie instead of forcing them out.

One way to make the edges stay together is to wet the edge of the lower
crust and sprinkle flour over it (shaking off what does not adhere)
just before filling and putting on the upper crust.

If with all your care the juice begins to run out, either at the edge
or through the openings in the crust, remove the pie at once from the
oven and let it stand on the hearth or table until it stops boiling.
(If necessary, put a little dry flour in the space). Return to the oven
and by slow cooking it may not run out again; if it does, take it out
again, but do not leave it out until the fruit is perfectly cooked. It
would be too bad to waste all the labor of making a pie by serving it
underdone.

Make pies without under crust when preferred. Put a strip of paste
around the edge of a shallow pudding dish or deep pie pan, fill dish
with prepared fruit, sugar and flour, cover with a lid of paste, press
on to the strip and bake.

Fillings of squash, pumpkin or sweet potato pies may be baked on pie
pans, in custard cups or in pudding dishes, without a crust, and with
or without a meringue.

Serve fruit pies the day they are baked. Those that are unavoidably
left over, put into the oven and just heat through before serving, to
make like fresh pies.

Apple pies may be put together at night, kept in the ice box and baked
the next morning.

For custard or other deep pies, cut the crust with the shears about ½
inch larger than the pan, moisten the under side of the edge slightly
and pinch it up with floured thumb and finger so that it will stand up
above the edge of the pan. The crust may be pinched up before trimming
and cut around the edge of the pan with a knife. It is a good plan to
set the prepared crust in the ice box long enough to become firm before
filling.

Crust may be put on to several pans when making pies one day and baked
when desired.

Several crusts can be baked at a time, then just heated before using.

To bake before filling without blistering, put pastry on to one pan,
set another of the same size into it and bake between the two.

Another way is to cover the pastry with paraffine paper and fill to the
depth of ½ in. with flour. The partially browned flour may be used in
soups and gravies afterwards.

Fill pastry-lined patty pans with raw rice, cover with an upper crust
and bake when baked patty cases are desired. The rice will not be
injured and the crusts will keep their shape.

Sometimes with two-crust pies, sprinkle sugar over the top of the crust
when done and leave in the oven for two minutes.

Lattice work of strips of crust put on in diamonds or squares makes
an attractive finish for such lemon and orange pies as will hold the
strips up, as well as for cranberry and mince pies.

Beat whites of eggs for meringue with woven wire spoon or silver fork
until stiff; add ½-1 tablespn. of sugar to each white and beat till
very stiff, add flavoring, pile in rocky form on to hot pie, bringing
meringue well out over the crust; brown delicately on top grate of
moderate oven. As soon as the tips are tinted the meringue is done.
Overbaking makes it tough and causes it to draw away from the edges.
Having the pie hot when the meringue is put on helps to cook it more
evenly and keeps it from becoming watery next to the pie.

When but one white is to be used for a meringue, do not beat it quite
so stiff and use a little more sugar so that it will spread over the
top of the pie well.

Tiny dots of beaten jelly may be placed with a pastry tube in the
depressions of the meringue of lemon pies, after baking.

In cutting pies with a meringue, cut just through the meringue first
with a thin bladed knife dipped in cold water; afterwards cut to the
bottom.

Pies should always be left so that a current of air will pass under
them while cooling to keep the crust from soaking.

=★ Pastry for one Large Pie=

    2½ cups flour, salt
    large ⅓ cup of cooking oil
    1-1½ teaspn. lemon juice
    ice water

Have all ingredients as nearly ice cold as possible. Dip the flour
lightly into the cup with a spoon, do not shake it down. Mix salt with
flour; pour oil over and chop it in with a spoon; do not mix much. Put
the lemon juice in a cup, add water to make ¼ of a cup, and pour over
the flour and oil mixture, adding enough more water to make a rather
soft dough; chop all together with a spoon, press into a mass without
kneading, roll out without mixing on a well floured board, with a well
floured rolling pin. A little more oil will be required when lemon
juice is not used.

Nut or olive oil may be substituted for cooking oil, with a slightly
smaller proportion of olive oil. Olive oil does not, of course,
harmonize as well in flavor with all fillings as the others.

⅓ farina may be used in crust, with less shortening.

In mixing crust for several pies at once, not quite so large a quantity
will be required for each.

Keep crust that is left each time well covered in a cool place and when
making pies again, chop or grind it and mix it with the flour before
adding the oil. It will make the new crust more flaky.

“=Pie Flakes=”

Mix flour, salt and oil for a quantity of pies. Put into a large,
close covered jar (or tin pail lined with waxed paper) and set in cold
place. To make a pie, take out about 2⅓ cupfuls, add water and mix and
roll as usual.

=Hot Water Crust=

Mix together equal quantities of oil and boiling water and pour over
flour which has been mixed with salt.

This crust rolls out more easily than ice water crust but is not as
tender and flaky. A slightly larger proportion of oil may be used, but
if too rich, the crust cannot be handled at all.

=★ Cream Pastry=

Mix flour and salt and pour enough thick sweet or sour cream over to
roll out well. The thicker the cream, the better the crust will be.
Sour cream makes more crisp and tender crust than sweet and has not the
least sour taste when baked.

=Butter Crust=

Rub together ½ cup (¼ lb.) butter and 2 cups (½ lb.) flour; wet with
ice water to make of a rollable consistency, press into a mass and set
in the ice box. When thoroughly chilled, roll ⅓-½ inch thick; spread
with butter, sprinkle lightly with flour, roll up, cut across the roll
and roll pieces out thin for the pie. Butter pastry is not tender even
when much pains is taken with it and the flavor is not agreeable.

=Bread Pie Crust=

    4 slices small loaf of bread
    boiling milk, salt
    6 tablespns. oil
    2-2½ cups flour

Dip slices of bread in boiling milk, cool, add oil, salt, and flour to
roll. This makes two under crusts.

=Nut Meal Crust=

    2 cups flour
    1 cup home made peanut meal
    salt
    cream

Mix flour, meal and salt, pour enough moderately rich cream over to
make a paste to roll out. A little oil may be added to the meal and
flour, and water used in place of cream.

=★ Granella Crust=

For one good sized pie take about ½ cup of granella (less if fine, more
if coarse, but it is better not to be too coarse nor too very fine).
Mix a little salt with it and pour over it quickly, enough rich milk or
thin cream to moisten it slightly, about ¼ cup, perhaps. (If too moist,
the crust will be soggy.) Turn immediately on to the pan and spread
and press it evenly with a spoon over the bottom and sides, dipping
the spoon often into cold water. A teaspoon is best for the sides, and
holding the forefinger of the left hand above the edge of the pan as
you are pressing with the spoon makes the edge of the crust firmer and
smoother. Do not let the crust come over the edge of the pan, because
only that part which adheres to the filling will come out with the
pieces of pie when served; the remainder will drop off and be wasted.
For that reason the crust should be just as thin as it is possible
to pat it out on the pan. Be careful to make the crust in the angle
between the bottom and sides of the pan no thicker than in any other
part. The novice usually fills that in rounding. A positive pressure
of the teaspoon in pressing the paste up on the edge of the pan will
remove the extra portion there.

In baking these crusts before filling, watch them that they do not get
too brown, and handle them carefully.

I have been thus explicit because this is of all pie pastes the most
important hygienically and in point of time. It is very quickly and
easily made, in fact, it must be made quickly. If the crust stands long
after the liquid is added, it does not spread well.

In making a large number of pies, mix each crust separately; you will
save time. Zwieback crumbs may be used instead of granella and almond
or cocoanut cream in place of dairy. The cream must be thin or the
crust will not spread well.

=Granella Crust No. 2=

Allow scant ⅔ cup of granella to each pie. Measure up the quantity
required. Mix the salt with it and pour oil over in the proportion of
½ tablespn. of oil to each pie. (¾ tablespn. melted butter may be used
and no salt.) Rub all well together with the hands, take out enough for
each pie at a time, wet with cold water and proceed as in the preceding
recipe. This mixture will need to be quite wet to spread.

Zwieback crumbs may be used for this also.

=Fillings for Granella Pies=

The pulp of stewed prunes, peaches, apricots or dried apples, or other
not too juicy materials, with or without a meringue or whipped cream,
or a sprinkling of dry granella on the top.

Cooked fillings of cream or lemon pies are delightful in the baked
crusts.

If you have not a pie knife, use two broad flat knives in serving a pie
with granella crust.

=★ Apple Pie=

    5 or 6 medium sized, tart, juicy apples
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    ⅓-¾ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. flour
    crust

Prepare apples according to directions for apple sauce, p. 47, cut the
quarters in two if large, then in halves crosswise. This will give
irregular shaped pieces which when placed in the crust will allow
spaces for the steam to come in contact with the fruit and cook it more
quickly and thoroughly than when packed in slices.

Mix the sugar, flour and salt for each pie in a bowl by itself. When
the bottom crust is on the pan, spread about half the sugar mixture
over it, put in a generous quantity of apples so that when baked the
pie will be level, not depressed, and sprinkle the remainder of the
mixture over, taking pains to have a little more at the edges because
of not having any underneath there. It is very disappointing to find
the last mouthfuls of pie near the crust less sweet than the first from
the center.

Be sure that the edge of the under crust is moistened, lay on the
upper crust as directed, press the edges down well, trim off the extra
crust (unless you fold it under the bottom crust), and with the thumb
and forefinger press the edges well together.

Make incisions in the crust with a sharp pointed knife for the steam
to escape, bind the edges with strips of cloth and bake in a moderate
oven, turning occasionally, for ¾-1 hour. To be sure that the apples
are tender try them with a broom splint through the spaces in the crust.

Brown sugar or molasses may be used to sweeten apple pies once in a
while as some people are very fond of those sweets. The nice dried
greening apples that we get sometimes may be soaked over night and used
the same as fresh apples.

=Other Fruit Pies=

=Apple and Elder-berry=--1½ pt. apple prepared as for apple pie, 1 pt.
elder-berries, ¾ cup sugar, 1 tablespn. flour, 2 teaspns. lemon juice,
salt. Lemon juice may be omitted. A smaller proportion of elder-berries
maybe used and the pie still be delicious.

=Dutch Apple=--Fill a buttered pie plate with apples without sugar, dot
with bits of butter, cover with a rather thick crust and bake. Invert
on dessert plate, sprinkle with sugar (mixed with coriander if liked)
and serve hot.

=Phoebe’s, Delicious=--Nearly fill the crust with dry, nicely seasoned,
fresh apple sauce; cover with a ⅓ inch layer of raspberry jam which has
been beaten so as to spread well; bake. The jam may be put on after the
pie is baked, or both apple and jam may be put into a baked crust. The
pie may have a meringue, but Phoebe’s didn’t.--It may also be baked
with two crusts.

=Rhubarb and Apple=--1¼ qt. rhubarb, ⅓-½ cup thick, slightly sweetened,
strained apple sauce, 1½ cup sugar, 2½ tablespns. flour, ¼ teaspn.
salt. Mix apple sauce with rhubarb and proceed as in apple pie.

=Blueberry=--Scant 1 qt. berries, 1 tablespn. flour, ¼ teaspn. salt. A
little water if berries are dry.

=Mock Cherry=--1½ cup cranberries, ¾ cup seeded raisins, ¾ cup sugar,
1½ tablespn. flour, a pinch of salt, 1¼ cup boiling water. Mix sugar,
flour and salt; pour boiling water over and boil up. Cut cranberries in
halves and raisins in small pieces with the shears and add to syrup. 2
crusts.

=Cranberry and Raisin=--1 cup ground cranberries (2 cups before
grinding), 1 cup ground raisins (1½ cup before grinding), 1 cup sugar,
1 tablespn. flour, 1¼ cup water, salt. Mix sugar, flour and salt; pour
boiling water over, stirring, boil up, add cranberries and raisins. 2
crusts, or strips of pastry across top.

=Cranberry=--1 lb. (4⅔ cups) whole berries, 1½ cup sugar, 1 tablespn.
flour, ¼-½ cup water, 2 crusts.

=Stewed Cranberry=--Fill crust with thick, strained, stewed
cranberries, sweetened. Put strips of crust across the top in squares
or diamonds.

=Currant=--1 qt. ripe red currants, 1¼ cup sugar, 3 or 4 tablespns.
flour, ¼ teaspn. salt, 2 crusts. Bake well.

=Black Currant=--Black currants with sugar, flour, salt and water make
a delicious pie. They should not be laid too thick in the plate. A
layer of thin slices of apple with the currants is good.

=Currant and Raspberry=--About ⅓ raspberries to ⅔ currants, sugar,
flour, salt.

=Currant and Raisin=--2½ cups red currants, 1 cup chopped raisins, ¾
cup sugar, 2 tablespns. flour, ¼ teaspn. salt.

=Elder-berry=--To each pint of elder-berries use 1 tablespn. lemon
juice, ½-1 cup sugar, ½-1 tablespn. flour, ¼ teaspn. salt.

=Fig--Mrs. Webster=--1 lb. figs, 1 cup sugar, 3 cups water, 1½-2
tablespns. lemon juice, salt. Wash and grind or chop the figs, pour the
water over them warm and let stand over night; add grated rind of ½ the
lemon with other ingredients. 2 crusts.

=Green Gooseberry=--1 qt. berries, 1¼ cup sugar, 1 tablespn. flour, ½
teaspn. salt.

=★ Mince Filling=

    3 pts. chopped tart apples
    3 cups (1 lb.) seeded raisins, chopped
    ½ cup lemon juice
    1 cup strong cereal coffee
    1½ cup nice-flavored dark molasses
    1-2 teaspns. salt
    2 teaspns. ground coriander seed

Grind raisins through medium cutter, then the apples which have been
pared, quartered and cored; mix all the ingredients and heat to
boiling; put into jars and seal, or keep in cool place in stone jar.
Add a little water if necessary when making pies and do not fill crusts
too nearly full. Make a lattice-work top of strips of pastry sometimes,
instead of a top crust. Serve warm as a rule. Follow this recipe
exactly.

We may use a little browned flour and water instead of the cereal
coffee.

=Green Tomato Mince-meat=

    1 pk. green tomatoes
    2 lbs. (6 cups) raisins
    1⅓ tablespn. ground coriander seed
    5 teaspns. salt
    5-6 cups brown sugar
    4 cups strong cereal coffee
        (or 4 tablespns. sugar, caramelized, and water added)
    1 cup lemon juice

Chop or grind the tomatoes, drain, measure the juice and add an equal
quantity of water in its place. Grind the raisins rather coarse,
combine all ingredients except lemon juice, cook 30 m., or until done,
add lemon juice, boil up, put into jars and seal if intending to keep
for some time.

=Crumb Mince-meat=

    1 cup cracker or dry bread crumbs
    1 cup molasses
    1 cup sugar
    ½ cup lemon juice
    1½ cup water
    ½ teaspn. ground coriander seed
    1 tablespn. butter

Mix, boil, put into crusts. Grape juice may be used for part of the
water with or without the coriander seed.

=Sour Cream Mince--Annie Carter=--1 cup sour cream, 1 tablespn. flour,
1 egg, ¾ cup sugar, 1 cup seedless raisins, steamed; two crusts. Bake
just long enough to set the egg and bake the crust. The crust need not
be quite as rich as for fruit pies. One tablespn. of lemon juice may be
used. May use chopped seeded raisins or English currants in place of
seedless raisins. The sugar may be flavored with oil of lemon.

=Fresh Peach=--Put sliced ripe peaches in baked crust; sprinkle with
sugar and cover with whipped cream or an uncooked meringue. Serve at
once. Cut pie before covering with cream or meringue. _Mellow bananas_
may be substituted for peaches and a very delicate sprinkling of sugar
used.

=Prune=--Pitted stewed prunes in quarters, flour, salt and a little
sugar. Do not make filling too thick as it is solid. Two crusts.
Delicious.

=Prune=--Thick prune pulp, slightly sweetened or not, one crust, strips
of pastry over top if convenient. May have meringue with or without
grated lemon rind, or may be covered with whipped cream after cutting.

=Raisin=--1 cup chopped raisins, 1 cup water, ½ cup brown sugar, 1
tablespn. flour. Mix sugar and flour, pour boiling water over, boil
up well, add raisins, cool, bake between two crusts. Vanilla or lemon
flavoring may be used.

=Raisin Meringue=--Add yolks of 2 eggs to filling of raisin pie with or
without 1 tablespn. of butter a moment before removing from the fire;
when heated, add vanilla, turn into baked crust and meringue with the
2 whites of eggs. Milk may be used instead of water and white sugar
instead of brown.

=Raisin Lemon=

    1⅓ cup water
    ¾-⅞ cup sugar
    1 level tablespn. butter
    ¾ cup seeded raisins
    4 tablespns. flour
    3 tablespns. lemon juice and pulp
    grated rind of 1 lemon
    1 egg,
    salt

Mix sugar and flour, pour boiling water over, add butter and raisins,
cook; when raisins look plump, remove from fire, add remaining
ingredients and bake between 2 crusts. The raisins may be chopped.

=Rhubarb=--1-1¼ qt. rhubarb, in ¾ in. pieces, 1½ cup sugar, 2½
tablespns. flour, ¼ teaspn. salt.

=Rhubarb and Pineapple=

    1 large pt. rhubarb
    1⅔ cup shredded pineapple
    1¼ cup sugar
    2½ tablespns. flour
    ¼ teaspn. salt

=Elizabeth’s Rhubarb=--1 cup chopped rhubarb, ½ cup molasses, ½ cup
chopped or ground raisins. 2 crusts.

=Rhubarb and Strawberry=

    1 pt. fresh rhubarb
    1 rounded pt. strawberries
    1¼ cup sugar
    2 tablespns. corn starch (or
    3 tablespns. of flour)
    ¼ teaspn. salt

=Canned Rhubarb=

    Scant quart canned rhubarb
    1¼ cup sugar
    2 tablespns. flour
    ¼ teaspn. salt

=Strawberry Meringue=--Put thin layer of universal crust in shallow
pudding dish or deep pie pan; when light bake; fill with berries,
sprinkle with sugar, and meringue with the whites of 2 or 3 eggs, and
1½ tablespn. sugar.

=Green Tomato--Harriet=

    1 qt. sliced tomatoes
    1 cup sugar
    3 tablespns. flour
    ½ teaspn. salt

Select tomatoes that are just going to turn, or that may be a little
white, or that may have a trifle of red on one side, not those that
are at all ripe, yet not very green ones. Make pie in pudding dish or
shallow granite basin and do not have the crust come quite to the top.
Bake very slowly, after the first 10 m., for 2 hours. The pie is not
good unless baked slowly for a long time.


LEMON PIES

=Lemon Pie--Granella Crust=

    4 tablespns. lemon juice
    1½ cup sugar
    1⅓ cup water
    5 or 6 tablespns. flour
    yolks 2 or 3 eggs
    ¼ teaspn. salt

Flavor sugar with oil of lemons (p. 27), add flour, mixing well, and
pour the perfectly boiling water over, stirring until smooth; boil,
add the slightly beaten yolks, lemon juice and salt; heat just enough
to set the egg. Turn the filling into the baked granella crust and
spread quickly around the edges so as to touch the top of the crust.

_Meringue_--Whites of 2 eggs, ½ tablespn. lemon juice, 2-3 tablespns.
sugar. Beat whites with a little salt to moderately stiff froth, add
lemon juice and beat stiff; fold in the sugar and drop by spoonfuls on
the hot pie; brown delicately on top grate of oven. This filling may be
used in any baked crust.

=★ Lemon Cake or Sponge Pie=

    1 cup sugar
    3 tablespns. flour
    1 cup milk
    2 eggs
    salt
    4 tablespns. lemon juice
    grated rind

Mix sugar, salt and flour; add milk gradually, stirring until smooth;
pour over beaten yolks of eggs, add lemon juice and rind and lastly,
stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Bake in slow oven 30 m., or until just
done.

=Lemon Cream Pie, large=

    2⅓ cups rich milk
    1¾ cup sugar
    1⅓ cup flour
    grated rind of 1 lemon
    4½ tablespns. lemon juice
    2 large eggs

Mix flour, sugar and salt, pour boiling milk over, stirring, boil till
very thick; add lemon juice and yolks of eggs, stir until well mixed
and eggs cooked; spread in baked granella or pastry crust and cover
with the meringue.

=Ma’s Lemon Pie=

    grated rind of 1 lemon
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 cup thick sweet or sour cream
    1 cup sugar

Mix cream and sugar, add lemon juice and rind. Two crusts.

=Starchless Lemon Pie=

    ¾ cup sugar, flavored
    yolks 4 eggs
    whites of 2 eggs
    3 tablespns. lemon juice in measuring cup.
    Fill cup with water

_Meringue_--2 beaten whites, ½-1 tablespn. sugar.

=Lemon Pie--Cornstarch=

    1½ cup water
    ½ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. butter
    2½ tablespns. corn starch
    1 cup sugar
    3½ tablespns. lemon juice
    lemon rind
    yolks 2 or 3 eggs
    whites 2 eggs

Mix corn starch, the ½ cup of sugar and butter, pour boiling water
over, cook; remove from fire, add the 1 cup of sugar, the lemon juice,
grated rind and beaten yolks of eggs; bake in 1 crust, meringue with
whites of eggs and sprinkle sugar over the top. Butter may be omitted.

=Lemon Pie without eggs or milk=

    ¾-1 cup sugar
    2 tablespns. corn starch
    1 cup hot water
    2 tablespns. melted butter
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    grated rind of 1 lemon

Mix sugar and corn starch in double boiler, pour boiling water over and
cook until thick, add butter and beat, then add lemon juice and grated
rind. Two crusts.

=Mrs. Hance’s Lemon Pie=--Pare 1 lemon thick enough to remove all the
white part, cut in thin slices and remove the seeds. Add 1 egg and ¾
cup of sugar, beat well and turn on gradually 1 cup of cold water. Two
crusts.

=Lemon Pie that will keep several days=

    1 large lemon
    1 egg
    ⅔ cup sugar
    ⅓ cup molasses
    salt

Grate the rind and as much of the lemon as possible, remove seeds,
squeeze out the juice and chop pulp and skin very fine; beat the egg,
mix all the ingredients and bake between 2 crusts.

=Lemon Pie with Bread=

    2 slices bread ½ in. thick
    1 cup boiling water
    1 level tablespn. butter
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    grated rind of lemon
    1 scant cup sugar
    2 eggs

The slices should be from a medium sized, brick shaped loaf of bread.
Cut off the crusts and pour boiling water over; add butter and beat
with a fork until the bread is smooth; then combine with the rind and
juice of the lemon, the sugar and beaten yolks. Bake in 1 crust and
meringue with whites of eggs.

=Lemon Custard Pie=

    4 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    4 tablespns. lemon juice
    flavoring
    1¾ cup rich milk
    salt

Leave out 2 whites of eggs and beat the remainder with sugar, add lemon
juice and flavoring, salt and milk. Bake slowly until just set, no
longer. Meringue.

=Orange Pie=

    5 tablespns. sugar
    1 tablespn. butter
    3 eggs
    juice and pulp of 2 oranges
    grated rind of 1 orange
    juice of 1 lemon
    grated rind of ½ lemon

Add beaten whites last. May omit butter.

=Orange Custard Pie=

    rind of 1 and juice of 2 oranges
    4 eggs
    4 tablespns. sugar
    1 pt. rich milk

Leave out 2 whites for meringue.


CREAM PIES

=Cream--Par excellence=--1½ pt. rich milk, ⅔ cup flour laid lightly in
cup, scant cup of sugar, 2 eggs, salt, 1 teaspn. vanilla. Mix flour,
salt and sugar, put into oiled saucepan, pour boiling milk over,
stirring until smooth, boil, add yolks of eggs, just heat, add vanilla,
turn into baked granella or pastry crust. Meringue. With some brands
of pastry flour, a scant measure only will be required. Thin slices of
banana may be laid on the baked crust before the filling is put in, for
banana flavor.

=Cocoanut Cream--Famous=--Same as cream pie with ¾ cup sugar only and
about ¾ cup desiccated cocoanut. (If cocoanut is fresh grated, use
1 cup sugar.) Add cocoanut just before putting filling into crust,
reserving enough to sprinkle the top of the meringue before baking.
Do not brown the meringue, just heat it until it puffs up and possibly
tints the tips of the cocoanut.

=Nut Cream=--Use chopped hickory or other nuts in place of cocoanut in
Cocoanut Cream Pie.

=★ Farina Cream=--Scant pt. rich milk, 1 tablespn. Hecker’s, 1½
tablespn. Am. Cereal Co’s farina, ⅓ cup sugar, 2 eggs (3 eggs enough
for 2 pies), 1 teaspn. vanilla. Heat milk and sugar to boiling, sift
in farina and cook for ¾-1 hour in double boiler; add slightly beaten
yolks of eggs, just heat through, remove from fire, add flavoring,
turn into baked granella or pastry crust. Meringue. Thin slices of
banana may be used to flavor this pie also but it is delicious with no
flavoring. Farina may be cooked 45 m. only, yolks and flavoring added
and the filling be baked in the crust.

=Cream of Rice=

    1 qt. rich milk
    ⅓ cup rice
    ⅓ cup sugar
    pinch of salt

Cook all together until thick and creamy. Turn into baked crust, brown
delicately over the top, cool.

Better the second day. Do not use with granella crust.

=Caramel Cream=--Steep ¼-⅓ cup cereal coffee in milk of cream pie, in
double boiler for 15 m., strain through 2 thicknesses of cheese cloth,
add milk or cream to make 1½ pt. Finish the same as cream pie. Flavor
with vanilla.

The pie may be made with not very rich milk and covered, after cutting,
with flavored, sweetened, whipped cream instead of being meringued.

=Tomato Cream--Fine=

    1½ cup very rich milk
    1½ cup strained tomato
    1 cup sugar
    ⅔ cup flour
    salt
    2 eggs
    vanilla

Mix sugar and flour, pour boiling milk over, then boiling tomato, boil
up, add salt and yolks of eggs, cook, add vanilla and put in baked
crust. Meringue. Use a little more flour when pie is to be eaten the
day it is made.

=My Mother’s=

    1 pt. thick cream
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. flour
    1 egg

Mix and bake in 1 crust; serve in very small pieces. No flavoring but
that of the cream is required and no meringue is necessary as the cream
gives a beautiful finish to the top of the pie.

=Parched Corn Cream=

    2⅔ cups rich milk
    ¼ cup parched corn meal
    ⅓ cup sugar
    salt
    3 eggs

Soak corn meal in milk 1 hour, cook until thickened; add salt, and eggs
beaten with sugar. Put into crust and bake. One white may be beaten to
stiff froth and stirred in last, and if wished, a little sugar may be
sprinkled over the top.

=Cream--Sour=

    1 egg
    1½ tablespn. flour
    ½ cup sugar
    salt
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    1 pt. thick sour cream

Mix flour, sugar and salt; turn beaten egg over and stir in cream
gradually; add vanilla and turn into crust; bake in moderate oven. If
preferred, 1 more egg may be used, the white beaten to a stiff froth
and stirred in last.

=Sour Cream=

    2½ cups sour cream
    2½-3 tablespns. flour
    1 cup sugar
    salt
    2 eggs
    vanilla, almond, rose or lemon

Bring cream just to boiling and pour over sugar and flour which have
been mixed together; boil up, add yolks of eggs, heat to thicken but do
not boil; add flavoring, turn into baked crust. Meringue with whites of
eggs.

=White Cream=

    whites of 3 eggs
    2 level tablespns. flour
    ½-1 cup sugar
    1 pt. cream
    flavoring

Beat whites with sugar, add other ingredients which have been mixed
together; bake in 1 crust.

=Custard Pie=--2½ cups rich milk, ⅓ cup sugar, 3 eggs, salt. Dusting of
coriander or anise, or any suitable flavoring.

=Custard Pie that Makes Its Own Crust=--1½ pt. rich milk (or scant 1½
pt. skimmed milk and 1½ tablespn. of butter), ⅓-½ cup sugar, 3 eggs,
4 tablespns. flour, salt; almond, lemon or coriander flavoring. Mix
ingredients, stirring flour with milk and pour into an oiled pie pan.
Bake very slowly.

The flour will settle to the bottom and form a delicate crust.

Use 1 more egg, mix ingredients with 2 whole eggs and 2 yolks more,
then add the 2 whites stiffly-beaten, at the last. This makes a more
attractive pie.

=Custard Pie Without Milk=--4 eggs, 3 or 4 tablespns. sugar, salt, 1
pt. boiling water, flavoring. Beat 2 whole eggs and 2 more yolks with
sugar and salt, pour boiling water over gradually, stirring, pour into
crust, dust with coriander, bake; meringue with whites of 2 eggs.
Vanilla, lemon or orange flavoring may be used in the pie. The whites
may be beaten stiff and stirred into the filling before baking instead
of adding the meringue.

=Rice Pie=

    1 good pint rich milk
    1 cup well cooked rice
    2 eggs
    4 tablespns. sugar
    vanilla, or no flavor

Dust with coriander sometimes. May beat eggs separate and add whites
last. One crust.

=Crumb Pie=

Line the pan with crust, put into it a large pint of rather dry bread
crumbs (cracker crumbs may be used) and turn over them sweetened, thin
cream to fill the crust. Bake. Serve warm or cold. Any desired flavor
may be used.

=★ Crumb Pie No. 2=

    1 cup fine dry bread crumbs
    ½ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. flour
    1 egg,
    2½ cups milk
    ground coriander seed or other flavoring

Mix crumbs, sugar and flour, add milk to beaten egg and pour over dry
ingredients, stirring, turn into crust, dust with coriander, bake in
moderate oven. Lemon or vanilla flavoring may be used in the pie but
they do not compare with the dusting of ground coriander seed.

=Buttermilk Pie. Excellent=

    1½ pt. buttermilk
    ¾ cup sugar
    scant ½ cup flour
    2 eggs
    salt
    lemon and rose flavor

Mix lemon flavored sugar with flour, heat buttermilk quickly in double
boiler and pour over the mixture, boil up well, add yolks of eggs, heat
to cook eggs but do not boil, add salt, turn into baked crust, cover
with meringue flavored with rose.

=Buttermilk Pie No. 2=

    ¾ cup sugar flavored with lemon
    2 eggs
    2½ tablespns. (¼ cup) flour
    1½ pt. buttermilk
    salt

Mix, bake in crust ½ hour in moderate oven. Flavor meringue with orange.

=Sour Milk Pie--Mock Lemon=

    2 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    1⅓ tablespn. corn starch
    2½ cups sour milk
    lemon flavor
    salt

Mix, leaving out whites of eggs, bake, meringue.

=Sour Milk Pie with Raisins=

    1 cup chopped raisins
    1 cup sugar
    2 eggs
    1 cup sour milk
    1 tablespn. butter
    flavoring if desired
    2 crusts

May use juice and grated rind of 1 lemon instead of butter.

=Sweet Potato Pie=

    1 cup mashed sweet potato
    ½ cup sugar
    yolks of 2 eggs
    2 cups rich milk
    salt

Mix all with beaten yolks of eggs, bake slowly, flavor meringue of
whites of eggs with vanilla.

=Squash Pies. Two large=

    2½ cups squash, not very dry
    1 scant cup sugar
    2 tablespns. flour
    salt
    2 eggs
    1 qt. rich milk
    1½ teaspn. vanilla
    a few drops of almond flavor

Mix sugar, flour and salt and stir into squash. Break eggs in and beat
a little, add milk gradually, then flavoring, bake in moderate oven.

With 3 cups of squash use a little less flour. For variety, flavor with
lemon or vanilla only, or with neither and stir in a little cocoanut,
sprinkling a little over the top.

=Bro. Cornforth’s Squash and Sweet Potato Pie=

2 eggs, ½ cup sugar, 1 pt. dry mashed squash and sweet potato (½
potato, ⅔ squash), 1 qt. milk, salt. No other flavor.

=Lemon Squash Pie=

    1½ cup nice dry squash
    2⅓ cups water or 2½ of milk
    ¾-1 scant cup sugar
    salt
    ¾ teaspn. vanilla
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    1½-1¾ tablespn. flour
    3 eggs
    3-5 drops lemon extract

Mix as usual, reserving the lemon extract and white of 1 egg for the
meringue. Bake in moderate oven and meringue with the white of egg
beaten not very stiff with 1-1½ tablespn. sugar and the lemon extract.
(A thick meringue seems out of place on a squash pie.) If preferred, 1
or 2 of the whites may be beaten stiff, flavored and stirred into the
pie before it is baked. ½-¾ cup soup cracker crumbs may be used instead
of eggs.

=Pumpkin Pies=

_Suggestions_--Select a dark, rich-colored pumpkin with deep
indentations and thick meat. Some of the small sugar pumpkins are very
nice.

Good pies cannot be made out of coarse-grained, watery pumpkins.

Baked pumpkin makes richer pies than stewed, with less work. To bake,
cut or saw a pumpkin into halves, and if large, cut into quarters;
place on a large tin and turn another over it; bake until tender.

To boil, cut in strips, remove fibrous portion from center, cut in
pieces and put over the fire in some thick-bottomed utensil, either
copper, re-tinned, or iron; add just enough water to keep it from
burning and simmer slowly, stirring often, for several hours until
the pumpkin becomes a rich brown and is well dried out. Rub through
colander while hot.

Pumpkin may be steamed in strips, unpeeled, but is not so rich.

The question of peeling is an open one; many claim that the rind gives
a richer flavor to the pies as well as a darker color, while others
fear it may give a strong flavor.

“The real genuine old-fashioned golden-brown pumpkin pie our
great-grandmothers prided themselves on” is made without eggs.

Long, slow baking is necessary to the perfection of pumpkin pies.

Cover crust of pies with a circle of paper if in danger of becoming too
brown.

Meringued patty pan pies or tartlets are very dainty and nice.

The addition of ¼ cup of date pulp (½ cup of dates steamed and rubbed
through the colander) to the filling for each pie gives a more
old-fashioned flavor, without harmful condiments.

=Pumpkin Pies Without Eggs--3 pies=

    1¼ qt. rich, dark, dry pumpkin
    3 pts. rich milk
    ¾ cup sugar
    ¼ cup molasses
    1 teaspn. salt
    1½ tablespns. browned flour No. 3
        or 3-6 tablespns. browned flour No. 2

Bake in not too rich crust in moderate oven 1½ hour. Use 1 cupful more
of pumpkin if not dry, and if necessary, 1½ level tablespn. of white
flour.

=Pumpkin Pies with Eggs--3 very large pies=

    1 qt. rich dark dry pumpkin
    2 qts. milk
    6 eggs
    1-1½ cup sugar
    or ¾ cup sugar and ¼ cup molasses
    1 teaspn. salt
    1½ tablespn. browned flour No. 3
    or 3-6 tablespns. browned flour No. 2

Beat whites and yolks of eggs separate; bake slowly until firm in
center. Use 1¼ qt. of pumpkin if not dry, and 1¾ qt. only of milk. May
use a little less pumpkin when adding dates.

=★ One Pumpkin Pie=

    1¾ cup moderately dry pumpkin
    ½ tablespn. browned flour No. 3, or
    1-2 tablespns. browned flour No. 2
    ½ level tablespn. white flour
    ¼ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. molasses
    ½ level teaspn. salt
    2⅓ cups milk
    1 egg

Bake in moderate oven. ⅓ nice winter squash improves the pie.

One recipe says ¼ teaspn. ground coriander seed. Some of the best pies
have no added flavoring.

1 teaspn. of butter or 1 or 2 tablespns. of thick cream in the filling
will give a gloss to the surface.

Some prefer flour, a little granella or a few zwieback crumbs to eggs,
for thickening when the pumpkin is not very thick.

=Grated Pumpkin Pie=

Grate pumpkin without peeling. If moist, put into a piece of cheese
cloth and squeeze out the water; for each pie take:

    1 cup pumpkin
    2 eggs
    2 tablespns. molasses
    1 or 2 tablespns. sugar
    pinch of salt
    ½ tablespn. browned flour No. 3 or 1-2 of No. 2
    1 teaspn. ground coriander, or ¼ level teaspn. ground anise seed,
        or 1 teaspn. vanilla, or no flavoring
    small piece of butter
    2 tablespns. cracker or zwieback crumbs
    1½-2 cups milk

Sprinkle top with cocoanut or not. Bake thoroughly.

=Carrot Pie=

    1¾ cup mashed cooked carrot
    ½ tablespn. browned flour No. 3
    or 1-2 tablespns. browned flour No. 2
    1 level tablespn. white flour
    ⅓ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. molasses
    ½ level teaspn. salt
    2⅓ cups milk
    1 egg
    dust with coriander

Or, use 3 tablespns. only of carrot, omit browned flour and flavor with
lemon or vanilla.

=Turnip Pie=

    1½-2 cups mashed turnip
    ⅓-½ cup brown sugar
    2 tablespns. molasses
    1 tablespn. melted butter
    2 eggs (or 1 egg and scant ¼ cup of granella)
    ½-1 tablespn. browned flour No. 3
    2 teaspns. ground coriander seed
    2 cups milk
    salt

The turnip should be the sweet Swedish turnip.




CAKES


The fact that soda and cream of tartar are the ingredients of the best
baking powders is well understood.

Dr. Lillis Wood Starr says: “Cream of tartar belongs to the same
class with soda. Soda is bi-carbonate of sodium; cream of tartar is
bi-tartrate of potassium. Sodium, potassium and calcium (lime) all
belong to the same group of metals and are injurious to the tissues of
our bodies.”

Dr. Lauretta Kress--“Cream of tartar or Potassium Bi-tartrate is a
gastro-intestinal irritant like soda. By combining cream of tartar
and soda, we have Rochelle salts. If needed as a cathartic, they are
better given as such on an empty stomach; then the system quickly gets
rid of them. If taken in food they are retained longer and become more
irritating.”

“Sugar when largely used is more injurious than meat.”

Cake at its best is not to be recommended, but for those who have not
yet discarded it, we give a variety of recipes for cakes without baking
powder or soda: there are some, also, without eggs.

When a few more eggs are used in a cake than would be required with
chemicals, remember that less of the nitrogenous is necessary in other
dishes: also, that the health of your family is of the first importance
and it would be better not to give them any cake at all than that which
will poison their systems.


Suggestions

Use pastry flour for all cakes; and since different brands even of
pastry flour differ, it is best to use the same brand when you find a
good one and become accustomed to it.

Sift flour once before measuring; and from 3-5 times for angel and
other sponge cakes after measuring. The best way to sift flour several
times is to lay down two pieces of large letter or Manila paper and to
sift the flour first on to one and then on to the other.

All measurements have the sifted flour laid lightly into the cup with a
spoon. If the cup is shaken or knocked on the side with the spoon there
will be too much flour.

Skimmed milk and oil may be used in cakes and the cream saved for other
purposes.

At great altitude, more flour and less shortening and sugar will be
required in cakes.

In recipes calling for cream of tarter, use lemon juice in the
proportion of 1 tablespn. or more to each teaspoon of cream of tartar.
A larger quantity of lemon juice makes the cake more tender.

2 whites of eggs are said to equal 1 rounded teaspn. of baking powder,
for lightness.

Boil molasses or syrup before using in cakes.

Half oil instead of all butter may be used in nearly all cakes, and in
some cases, all oil is better. Use salt with oil.

It is usually thought important to cream butter and sugar well
together, but one professional cake-maker told me that cakes were
lighter when the butter and sugar were just mixed.

Always add a little of the flour for cakes to the creamed butter or
sugar and butter, before adding eggs, milk or other liquids.

Saffron is used for both color and flavor: a very small quantity only,
is required of the imported for a deep color.

For variety, thin slices of sweet prunes or dates are nice in place of
other fruits in cakes.

Round tube pans bake cake the most evenly, Turk’s head molds being the
best of all.

Do not oil the tins, for cakes without shortening.

For cakes with shortening, oil the tins and sprinkle flour over,
shaking off all flour that is loose; or, line tins with well oiled
paper.

Some recommend dipping angel cake pans into cold water and filling
while wet; then the cake falls out white when cold, leaving the crust
sticking to the mold.

Always beat whites of eggs on a platter or in a large cake bowl or
“bombe” with a whip, not with a revolving beater.

Chop and fold, never stir, the whites into cake, the flour also.

Have all ingredients and utensils for sponge cake cold, and if
possible, put it together in a cold room.

For sponge cakes, follow directions for putting nut and citron cake
together, or the hot water way following sponge layer cake.

Bake sponge cakes very slowly and evenly in an oven that bakes well
from the bottom. They will retain their lightness better if carefully
inverted in the tin after baking and left in that position until cool.

Bake cakes with shortening in a moderate oven.

Cool all cakes slowly. One colored cook told me that she always set her
cakes on the stove hearth for a little while after taking them out of
the oven. Of course they should be handled carefully.

Set warm layer and other cakes on a cloth wrung out of cold water and
they will quickly loosen from the pan.

Loaf or layer cakes may be set in ice box in tins for 2 hrs. before
baking.

3 or 4 rose geranium leaves laid in the bottom of the tin before the
batter is poured in will flavor cake with rose, or the leaves may be
laid between layers after baking, while cooling. If the loaf is one
that will bear removing from the tin while warm, lay it on some of the
leaves.

Cakes may be steamed instead of baked--sponge cakes 1 hour, fruit
cakes longer. One recipe for fruit cake says, steam 4 hours and bake 1
hour. Use your judgment.

Sponge cakes--angel and others, are supposed to be broken apart with 2
forks, not cut.

If loaves of cake that are to be covered with whipped cream are cut
before the cream is put on, the cake will look smooth and nice and the
pieces will come out more neatly.

Cakes made with yeast require to be kept a little warmer than bread
(unless you keep bread too warm), and flour, fruit and all ingredients
should be warm when added.

=★ Nut and Citron Cake=

    3 large or 4 small eggs
    1 scant cup granulated sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    1 tablespn. ice water
    ⅔-¾ cup Brazil nut, almond, pecan or shell-bark meal
    ½ cup (¼ lb.) fine chopped or ground citron
    1 cup pastry flour
    salt

Have all the ingredients as nearly ice cold as possible; sift the
sugar, sift the flour twice and leave it in the sifter; beat the yolks
of the eggs in a cake bowl with a revolving egg-beater (a large one if
you have it), adding sugar gradually. When stiff, add part of the water
and more sugar; beat, add more water, sugar and half the lemon juice,
beating, until all the sugar is in.

Stir into this mixture half the nut meal, a pinch of salt and the
citron. Rest the egg beater on a quart measure (or some dish of the
required height) by the side of the bowl, and let it drain into the
bowl while beating the whites of the eggs. It will drain much cleaner
than it could be scraped, besides saving the time. Beat the whites of
the eggs to a moderately stiff froth, add the remaining half tablespn.
of lemon juice and whip till dry and feathery; let them stand a moment,
then slide onto the yolk mixture; sprinkle part of the nut meal over
them and sift on a little flour; chop in lightly, dipping from the
bottom with a large thin spoon three times; add more meal and flour;
chop; continue this until the flour is all in. Take care not to mix
too much; the mixture must not get soft. Put into pan at once and bake
slowly until the cake stops singing, or does not stick to a broom
splint. Bake 1½ hours, according to the heat of the oven. The fine
particles of citron give an unusually delightful flavor to the cake.
Preserved orange peel, ground, may be used sometimes; or fine cut
raisins or dried blueberries.

=★ Julia’s Birthday Cake=

    2 cups sugar
    ½-1 cup butter
    8 eggs
    2 cups flour
    flavoring

Cream butter and sugar; add flavoring and a little of the flour, then
the beaten yolks; beat well. Slide the stiffly-beaten whites on to this
mixture, sift flour over gradually and chop together as for nut and
citron cake; bake in moderate oven in 3 medium sized layers; sift a
little sugar over one layer before baking, sometimes, to make a crust
for the top. If possible, set in ice box for an hour before baking.

=Patty Cakes=

Use ⅓-½ cup of milk and 2½-2¾ cups of flour in preceding recipe, and
bake in patty pans.

=Cocoanut Loaf or Layer Cake=

    2 cups sugar
    4 level tablespns. butter
    8 eggs
    2 cups fine grated or ground cocoanut
    2 teaspns. lemon juice
    1-2 teaspns. vanilla if desired
    2 cups flour

Put together the same as “Julia’s Birthday Cake,” let stand on ice for
2 hours, or bake at once in loaf or layers.

If baked in layers, use Washington pie filling with it.

=Rich Loaf Cake=

    1 cup butter
    1⅔ cup granulated sugar
    5 eggs
    2-2¼ cups flour

Cream butter, add sugar and work very light; add 1 egg at a time
and stir only until no yolk can be seen; mix in flour, turn into
paper-lined pan and set in ice box for 2 hours. Bake in slow oven about
an hour, or until the cake stops singing.

=Rice Flour Cake=

    ¾ cup butter
    2 scant cups sugar
    2¼ cups rice flour
    6 eggs
    2-3 tablespns. lemon juice with grated rind

Cream butter, add sugar, a little of the flour and beaten yolks with
half the juice and all the rind of lemon.

Beat whites of eggs with a little salt, adding the remainder of the
lemon juice when half beaten; slip on to cake batter, sift flour over
gradually, and fold all lightly together. Put into pan to depth of not
over 2 in. Bake in moderate oven.

=Fruit and Nut Cake. Unsurpassed=

    1⅓ cup sugar
    ⅔ cup butter
    1⅓ cup flour
    6 eggs
    4 cups (1⅓ lb.) seeded raisins
    3 cups (1 lb.) currants
    1½ cup (½ lb.) ground citron
    large ¾ cup blanched almonds, ground
    ¼-½ teaspn. extract rose, according to strength
    (rose leaves in their season)

Mix fruit with part of the flour, add nuts; cream butter with a little
of the flour; beat together the sugar and yolks of eggs until very
light and add with extract to creamed butter; beat well; whip whites
of eggs with pinch of salt to stiff froth, add fruit and nuts to yolk
mixture, chop in beaten whites and remainder of flour; bake in well
oiled tin 1½-2½ hrs. in moderate and slow oven; cover when necessary.

The cake may be steamed 3-4 hrs. and baked ½-1 hr.

This cake will keep a long time with care and is unusually desirable. 3
times the quantity given will make 4 medium sized loaves.

=Corn Starch Cake=

    6 eggs
    ½ cup butter (part oil)
    1⅓ cup sugar
    1½ cup flour
    3 tablespns. corn starch
    flavoring

Beat yolks with half the sugar and cream butter with the other
half; mix, beat. (Part of the flour and corn starch may be added to
the butter and sugar.) Beat whites of eggs stiff, slide on to the
mixture, add flour and corn starch (which have been sifted together)
gradually, chopping and folding in with the whites; bake in moderate
oven. Two thick round layers.

[Illustration: THE MISSES LISK CAKE TINS]

=★ Silver Cake=

    1 lb. (2 cups and 3 tablespns.) sugar
    ¾ lb. (3⅛-3½ cups) flour
    6 oz. (¾ cup soft) butter
    rose flavor
    1½ cup citron or prunes in slices
    whites of 14 eggs

Cream butter and sugar, add flavoring, beaten whites and flour, lay
slices of fruit in and on top of cake. One very large square, or two
rather small round loaves.

=★ Scotch Short Bread--no eggs=

    ½ cup butter
    ½ cup granulated or brown, or slightly rounded ½ cup powdered sugar
    1 teaspn. caraway seed or not
    2 cups flour

Cream butter, add sugar and flour mixed, seeds also if used. A little
of the flour may be saved for rolling.

Roll to about 1 in. thick, of the shape to fit your tin; crinkle the
edges, press them with a fork or cut with pastry jagger, slide on to
tin, prick lightly with fork and bake in a slow oven for 1 hour; or,
roll ½ in. thick and bake ½ hour only. The cake is sometimes creased in
squares before baking, or the dough may be cut in round cakes and the
edges crinkled.

The cake is better with oil and ¼ teaspn. of salt in place of butter.
One cup of sugar is sometimes used with ½ cup of butter or oil, and
again, 1 cup of butter or oil with ½ cup of sugar, but the cake is very
nice with the proportions given. By some, brown sugar is considered
most suitable.

=German Light Cake=

    1⅛ cup butter or 1¼ cup oil
    1¼ cup granulated sugar
    2½-2¾ cups flour
    ⅞ cup almonds, blanched and chopped
    4 eggs
    grated orange rind
    ground coriander seed

Cream butter with a little flour, add eggs, one at a time, beating,
add sugar (except a little for the top), rind and flour; spread thin
in oiled pans, sprinkle with almonds, coriander and sugar, bake in
moderate oven, cut in squares while hot, leave in pan to cool.

=★ Sister Elliott’s Plain Loaf Cake and Cookies=

    ½ cup oil
    1½ cup sugar
    yolks 2 eggs
    4½ cups flour
    1 cup milk
    salt, flavoring
    whites 3 eggs

Cream oil and sugar, add a little flour, yolks of eggs, salt and
flavoring, then milk and flour alternately; beat well and fold in the
stiff whites of eggs. Chill, or bake at once thoroughly, in 1 large or
2 small loaves in moderate oven that bakes well from the bottom.

For cookies, use 2 whites of eggs only and make dough stiff enough to
roll.

=Molasses Cake=

    4 large eggs
    3 level tablespns. butter
    ½ cup molasses
    ½ cup sugar, brown or white
    1 teaspn. lemon juice
    1½ teaspn. grated orange peel
    1½ tablespn. browned flour
    1 cup pastry flour

Beat eggs and lemon juice in bowl set in boiling water, add sugar, then
boiling molasses, with butter and orange peel, and lastly the flour.

=Molasses Sugar Cakes=

    4 eggs
    ⅓ cup (4½ level tablespns.) butter
    ⅞ cup molasses sugar
    ⅓ teaspn. lemon extract
    1 cup pastry flour
    1½ tablespn. browned flour
    1 teaspn. lemon juice

Mix butter and sugar and add to beaten yolks, beating well; slide on
to this the whites beaten with salt and lemon juice, then sift over
gradually the two flours mixed, chopping and folding them in with the
whites. Bake in small cakes in moderate oven 15-20 m. Use grated maple
sugar for maple cakes.

=★ Molasses Bread or Hard Molasses Cake--no eggs=

    1¾ qt. (7 cups) flour
    1 cup butter (part oil)
    1¼ cup pressed down, medium brown sugar
    1 cup molasses
    1 teaspn. ground anise seed
    salt

Cream butter and sugar, add anise and molasses, beat well and add
flour; turn mixture out on floured board, mold up and put into flat
tins about 1 in. deep, wash over with milk and bake in a very slow oven.

When done, wrap or cover with damp cloths and keep at least 4 days
before using. If necessary, moisten the cloths again, and perhaps
again. The cakes will be hard and dry when taken from the oven, but
keeping them for a few days in damp (not wet) cloths makes them nice
and tender. Grated orange peel and vanilla, together or separate, may
be used for flavoring; but the delicate flavor of anise is especially
agreeable.

By weight, the ingredients are 1½ lb. pastry flour, ½ lb. butter, ½ lb.
brown sugar, ⅞ lb. molasses.


YEAST CAKES

It is especially important to use pastry flour in cakes made with yeast.

A good liquid yeast gives better results in cake, but compressed yeast
may be used.

=★ Saffron Cake--no eggs=

    2 cups milk
    4 tablespns. yeast
    8½ cups flour
    2 cups (1 lb.) butter
    2½ cups sugar
    ¼ cup domestic saffron, not more than 1 teaspn. of imported
    1 cup water in which saffron has been steeped ½ hr.
    3 cups currants
    2 cups fine cut or ground citron
    1 teaspn. lemon extract

⅔-1 cake compressed yeast dissolved in a very little water, with sugar,
may be used instead of soft yeast, and 1 extra tablespn. of water added
to the sponge.

Make a sponge at night of the milk (just warm), yeast and 4½ cups of
flour, and in the morning add the cup of warm saffron water. Cream the
butter and sugar with a little flour, add the sponge gradually, mixing
and beating, then the remainder of the flour warm (except a little
which has been used to dust the fruit), beat well, add the extract and
warmed, floured fruit, mix and pour into 3 good sized paper lined cake
pans. Let stand until bubbles appear in the batter, usually 2-3 hrs.
with soft yeast; not so long, perhaps, with compressed; when light, put
into a slow oven; let cakes come up slowly and bake very moderately
until they stop singing, 1½-2 hrs., depending upon the heat of the
oven, but they must bake slowly.

When cake is started in the morning, 6 tablespns. of soft, or a whole
cake of compressed yeast may be used. The quantity of flour may need to
be varied a little according to the brand.

=Citron and Cocoanut Cakes--no eggs=

    1 cup milk
    2 tablespns. yeast, (or ⅓-½ cake compressed yeast
        with extra ½ tablespn. of water in sponge)
    4¼ cups flour
    1 cup butter
    1¼ cup sugar
    ½ cup water
    ¾-1 cup ground citron
    ¼ teaspn. weak extract rose
    1 cup shredded cocoanut
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Prepare as in preceding recipe (of which it is just half) and at the
last divide into 2 parts, add the citron and rose to one, and the
cocoanut and vanilla to the other. The loaves will not be very large.

=White Fruit Cake--no eggs=

The whole of the above recipe, using only ¾ cup of butter, with ¾-1 cup
of citron, 1 cup of cocoanut and ⅔ cup of almonds, all ground.

=★ Dried Apple Cake--yeast=

Cut 2 cups dried apples into small pieces with shears, soak over night
in 1½ cup water, then cook in ¾ cup molasses until transparent.

_Sponge_--1 cup water, 1 cake compressed yeast, 2½ cups flour.

_When light_, add ⅔ cup butter (or half oil) and ½ cup sugar creamed
together, the dried apples, grated rind of orange or lemon, 2 beaten
eggs and 2 cups flour.

One egg only may be used; the cake is excellent with no eggs.

=★ Washington Cake--no eggs=

Remember to lay flour lightly into cup.

  _Sponge_--

    1 pt. milk
    1 cake yeast
    ½ cup sugar
    1 qt. flour

  _When light_--

    salt
    1-1¼ cup sugar
    1 cup water in which a little saffron has been steeped
    1½ cup oil and butter, half of each
    ¾-1 teaspn. lemon extract
    6½ cups flour

Prepare same as saffron cake and bake in not too thick loaves.

=Washington Pie--no eggs=

Bake Washington cake in rather thin, flat loaf, split and put the
following cream between and around, or put cream over and around cake
without splitting.

  _Cream_--

    1½ tablespn. cooking oil
    2½-2¾ tablespns. flour
    1 pt. milk
    salt
    large ½ cup sugar
    yellow color
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Heat oil, add flour, then hot milk, salt and sugar, stirring smooth at
different stages. Steep a trifle of saffron in the milk. Add vanilla
when cold.

  _Another Cream_--

    1 tablespn. butter
    2½ tablespns. flour
    1 pt. boiling milk
    ⅓ cup sugar
    salt
    1 egg
    flavoring

=Elizabeth’s Raised Cake=

  _Sponge_--

    5-5¼ cups flour
    ½ cup sugar
    2 tablespns. yeast (or ½ cake compressed yeast)
    1½ cup milk

  _When light_--

    1½ cup sugar
    1 cup butter
    2 eggs
    1 cup raisins
    ⅓ cup citron

Make sponge at night with soft yeast or early in the morning with
compressed.

When light, add the butter, well creamed with the sugar, and beaten
eggs. Beat all very thoroughly and put into the tins. When partly
risen, stick the fruit in all over the top; let rise about 1½ hr., or
until bubbles may be seen; bake 1 hr. in moderate oven. The cake is
excellent without fruit.

=German Almond Loaf=

  _Sponge_--

    ¾ cup milk
    3 tablespns. liquid yeast or 1 cake compressed yeast
    3 cups flour

  _When light_--

    4 yolks of eggs
    1 cup sugar
    ¾ cup butter
    ¾ cup of warm milk
    3-4 cups flour
    halved blanched almonds or halves of pecans or walnuts
    grated rind of 1-1½ lemon

Beat yolks with sugar and add to butter which has been creamed with
part of the flour; then add the flavoring, the sponge, the milk and
the flour alternating, beating until the flour is all in. Butter tube
mold or other pans thick with cold butter and stick almonds to sides in
regular rows. Do not put any in the bottom. Half fill pan with batter
and let rise until pan is nearly full; bake 1 hr., or until cake stops
singing, in moderate and slow oven so as not to burn nuts.

=Cake Without Chemicals=

(Mrs. W. W. Wheeler, Ambato, Ecuador.)

    1 large cup thin bread sponge
    3 eggs, save out 1 white or yolk
    1 cup sugar
    5 tablespns. oil
    ⅔ cup flour

Beat eggs and sugar, add oil, then the sponge, lastly fold in the
flour; put into 3 layer cake pans and let stand for 2 or 3 hours in a
not very warm place. Bake in moderate oven.

Filling--Beat the white of egg stiff, add 1 tablespn. sugar and 2
tablespns. thick cream, or, make a cream sauce of the yolk.

=Maple Loaf Cake=

    1 cup bread dough
    ½ cup butter
    1 egg
    1 cup maple sugar

Cream the butter, add the sugar and beaten egg and mix all thoroughly
with the dough; add a little flour, turn into tin and let rise ½ hr. or
longer before baking.

=Raised Molasses Cake--no eggs or two whites=

_Sponge_--2 cups skimmed milk, 4 tablespns. yeast, 4½ cups flour.

_When light_--2 cups (1 lb.) butter, 2 cups molasses which has been
boiled and cooled to lukewarm, 3 cups (not too fine) nuts, raisins,
citron or cocoanut or combinations of same, 4-4½ cups flour, part for
fruit. The whites of 2 eggs may be used with the 4 cups of flour.

Attend to sponge and cake as soon as light. Steam or bake.

=German Coffee Cake--no eggs=

    1 pt. milk
    1 tablespn. butter
    2 tablespns. sugar
    ½-1 cake compressed yeast
    salt
    flour for soft dough

Let rise, knead, spread on flat tin with floured hand, ¾-1 in. thick,
spread with butter, sprinkle with sugar and ground coriander seed; or,
spread with an egg beaten with a teaspn. of sugar, sprinkle with sugar
and chopped or split blanched almonds; let rise; bake in moderate oven.

Use universal crust dough if a more tender cake is desired.

=★ Royal Sponge Cake=

    3 eggs
    ⅔ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    1 tablespn. ice water
    ⅔ cup pastry flour
    3 drops extract rose

Put together and bake same as nut and citron cake except for the nut
meal. This makes 1 loaf or 2 small layers. 3 times the quantity makes 2
large square loaves, or 4 large layers.

May use 1½ tablespn. of orange juice with yolks of eggs and ½ tablespn.
lemon juice with whites in place of the water and lemon juice. Flavor
sugar with oil of orange and add ½ teaspn. vanilla to the cake.
Finished with royal filling and icing, this makes a cake suitable for a
royal occasion.

=Variations of Royal Sponge Cake=

(1) Use 2 tablespns. of cream in cake instead of lemon juice and
water, with or without 1 teaspn. of lemon juice in whites of eggs.

(2) Use ⅔ cup of molasses in place of the sugar, no water, 1 teaspn.
only, of lemon juice in the whites of eggs, 1 cup of flour and 1-2
teaspns. ground coriander seed.

(3) Use brown sugar in place of white, and orange or vanilla flavoring.

=★ Sponge Layer Cake=

    3 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    4 tablespns. water
    1-1½ cup flour

Boil sugar and water till syrup will thread, pour hot syrup slowly over
beaten yolks; beat until cool, chop in stiffly-beaten whites and flour;
flavor if desired. 2 small layers.

The sponge layer cake and all sponge cakes containing the yolks of eggs
may be put together as follows: Break the eggs into a cake bowl, set
the bowl into a pan of boiling water on the table and beat until light;
add hot water (if any) and the sugar (or the hot syrup) gradually,
beating. When light, remove from water, add flavoring and fold in flour
lightly.

=★ Old Friend Sponge Cake=

    1½ cup granulated sugar flavored with oil of lemon
    large ½ cup cold water
    7 eggs
    1-1½ tablespn. lemon juice
    2½ cups flour, sifted 5 or 6 times after measuring

Pour cold water over sugar, heat and boil slowly until perfectly clear;
cool, beat yolks of eggs, add syrup and half the lemon juice and beat
very light; slide whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth with the
remainder of the lemon juice on to mixture, sift flour over, a little
at a time, and chop in with whites until all the flour is in. Bake
¾-1 hr. in slow oven until just done, no longer. 1 large loaf in deep
square tin.

=Cocoanut Sponge Cake. 1846=

    6 eggs
    1 cup sugar
    1 cup flour
    a trifle of salt
    1½ cup grated fresh cocoanut
    lemon or vanilla flavoring

Put together as nut and citron cake, or beat eggs in dish set in hot
water, add sugar, cocoanut and flavoring, then flour. Put mixture 1½
in. deep in pans lined with buttered paper.

=Rice Flour Sponge Cake. 1846=

    6 eggs
    ½ cup sugar
    flavoring
    ⅔ cup rice flour
    scant ⅓ cup pastry flour

Beat eggs in dish set in hot water, add sugar, flavoring and rice and
pastry flour mixed. Bake in moderate oven.

=Angel Cake=

    1 cup of egg whites 8 large or 10 small eggs
    1¼ cup granulated or 1½ cup powdered sugar
    1 cup flour
    1-2 tablespns. lemon juice
    a pinch of salt
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Sift 2 or 3 cups of sugar twice; measure out 1 cup; sift a sifter of
flour 4 times; measure out 1 cup and mix it with the cup of sugar;
put both in the sifter and sift once, return to the sifter and set in
cold place; separate the eggs, putting the whites into the dish in
which they are to be beaten and set them in a cold place for 15-20
m.; when cool, add the salt to the eggs and begin beating with a long
slow stroke, gradually increasing the velocity until the eggs begin to
stiffen, then pour the lemon juice over and beat more rapidly for a
time; continue beating until whites are stiff and feathery, then add
flavoring; sift flour and sugar mixture over gradually, chopping and
folding it in carefully; when all is in, drop by spoonfuls evenly into
the pan and bake in slow oven 35-50 m., testing with broom straw. When
done, turn the pan upside down with the sides resting on two saucers
(unless you have the pans with projections for that purpose), so that a
current of air will pass under and over the cake.

=Tri-Colored Layer Cake=

Angel cake--½ white flavored with vanilla; ½ pink flavored with rose, 3
or 4 large layers. Other layers, of sponge layer cake lemon flavored,
or some nice light brown cake such as molasses sugar cake or sponge
layer cake with part browned flour. Filling of raisin dressing.

=Miss Lubey’s Cream Puffs. 1 doz.=

    1 large cup boiling water
    ½ cup butter or oil
    1 cup pastry flour
    3 eggs
    salt

Add dry flour all at once to boiling water and butter; stir quickly
over the fire until mixture forms a ball which leaves the pan; remove
from fire and stir till partly cool; add beaten yolks of eggs, part at
a time, beating well, then slightly beaten whites; beat; set in cold
place, covered, for 1 hr. or more; drop by spoonfuls about 2 in. apart
on oiled and floured tin, flatten with brush or fingers dipped in milk
(may leave without shaping); have oven rather quick at first, then
slower until there is no “singing”. Puffs are light weight when done.
They will keep for several days. Reheat before filling. To fill, cut
open at the side with shears.

The butter and flour may be creamed together first, and the boiling
water poured over, then the whole cooked as before.

  _Cream_--

    1 pt. milk
    ½ cup sugar
    1 tablespn. flour
    2 eggs
    salt
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Mix sugar and flour, pour boiling milk over, boil up well; pour over
beaten eggs, return to fire until just creamy, not boiling, cool; add
salt and flavoring.

If cream is preferred thicker, use ½ cup of flour and cook in double
boiler 15 m. before adding the eggs.

Whipped cream may be used for the filling, but does not harmonize as
well with the shells.

These shells are sometimes used for trumese and celery salad, or for
creamed meat dishes.

Dainty little puffs filled with different creams may be used for
garnishes for desserts, or piled on fancy plates for cakes.


Additions to Cookies and Small Cakes

Caraway or anise seeds, ground coriander or anise seed; chopped shelled
nuts; grated or shredded cocoanut; grated orange or lemon rind; English
currants; fine cut or ground raisins, citron, figs and dates; sometimes
a raisin or half a blanched almond or half of a pecan or hickory nut
meat in the center of each.


Suggestive Combinations

Coriander, English currants and English walnuts; raisins in molasses
cookies; almonds chopped without blanching, and raisins; almonds same,
and caraway or ground coriander seed.

Graham flour cookies with English currants; 1 part raisins and ⅓ part
each of nuts, cocoanut and citron, with or without vanilla or lemon.

All cooky dough should be set in a cold place for 2 hrs. or longer
before rolling out. Roll out in cool room on well floured board. Cut
the cakes all out, put on tins and set in cold place before beginning
to bake them as the baking will require all one’s attention.

Very thin dough may be cut oblong, round or in any desired shape and
some of the following fillings placed between each two pieces before
they are baked--

Ground or mashed dates or figs rolled thin and cut with the same cutter
that the dough was cut with; raspberry or other fruit jams and jellies
or orange marmalade, also some of the suitable cake fillings.

It may sometimes be more convenient to cut the dough into strips 4 in.
wide, spread half the width with the fruit, fold the other half over,
pinch down the edge and cut into 3 in. lengths.

Tops of cookies may sometimes be brushed with white of egg and water or
with syrup of ½ cup each sugar and water boiled together; or, sprinkled
with sugar, coriander, chopped nuts or suitable fruits.

Instead of sprinkling cookies with different materials, brush the tops
with milk and turn them on to any preparation or mixture desired.

Grated and sifted maple sugar may be used in place of other sugar in
cookies by using a somewhat smaller quantity.

Oil and flour pans for baking cookies.

It is a good plan to bake cookies on the bottom of inverted dripping
pans. This prevents them from burning on the bottom and it is easier to
remove them from the tins.

=★ Rich Small Cakes--Cookies=

(_From an old recipe book of my auntie’s, published in 1846_)

    1 cup butter
    scant 1¼ cup sugar
    2⅔-2⅞ cups pastry flour
    2 eggs
    vanilla, almond or any desired flavoring

  _By weight_--

    ½ lb. butter,
    ½ lb. sugar,
    10 ozs. flour.

Cream butter, add sugar, beaten eggs, flavoring and flour; let stand
in cold place until thoroughly cold; roll ⅜-½ in. thick. Bake in oven
which is moderately hot at first, so cakes will not spread. Be careful
not to burn.

A little more flour may be used if preferred, also half oil instead of
all butter, and brown sugar instead of granulated.

For _Jumbles_, break off pieces of dough the size of a walnut and make
into rings by rolling out rolls as large as the finger and joining the
ends; or, cut in rings; dust with sugar.

=Yolk Jumbles=

    ¼ cup butter
    ½ cup sugar
    lemon flavoring
    yolks 4 eggs
    scant pint of flour
    salt

Poach yolks of eggs dry and mealy; rub them smooth and add butter
gradually, creaming; add sugar and flavoring, then flour, a little at a
time; cool, roll thin, cut with doughnut cutter, dust with sugar, bake.

=★ Cream Cookies=

    1½ cup sugar
    1 cup thin cream
    1 teaspn. vanilla
    yolks of 3 eggs
    scant ¾ cup butter and oil half and half
    about 4½ cups flour

Cream butter and sugar, stir in a little flour, add beaten yolks, beat
well, then add the cream gradually with the flavoring, and lastly, all
of the flour. Handle after mixing the same as rich small cakes. Fruits,
nuts or seeds maybe added. These cookies will keep almost indefinitely.

=Lunch Cakes=

Take ½ the sugar and a little more flour in rich small cakes, or cream
cookies, and roll to ½ or 1 in. in thickness. Cut of the size to fit
tins, crinkle edges or press with fork, crease in squares and bake in
moderate oven. Caraway or other flavoring may be used. Chopped nuts,
a little sugar and ground or shredded citron may be mixed on a board
or flat pan and one side of the cakes pressed into the mixture before
baking. Set in cold place before rolling out.

=Anise Wafers, or German Christmas Cakes=

    ½ cup butter
    1 cup sugar
    3 eggs
    ¾ teaspn. ground anise seed or 1 teaspn. whole seed
    flour for soft dough

Cream butter, add sugar and a little flour, with seeds, then the yolks
of the eggs, one at a time, and the stiffly-beaten whites, with flour,
folding together lightly; knead in flour for soft dough, cover and set
in cold place; roll rather thin, cut cakes about the size of a half
dollar.

=Sour Cream Cookies--no soda=

    1½ cup sugar
    1 cup thick sour cream
    yolks 3 eggs
    scant ¾ cup oil or butter
    any desired flavoring, fruits nuts or seeds
    5-5½ cups pastry flour

Mix lightly, set in cold place, roll rather thin.

=Honey Wafers=

    1 cup honey boiled and cooled
    ⅔ cup butter
    2 small eggs or 1 large one
    pinch salt
    5 cups flour

Cream butter with a little flour, add beaten egg and honey, then
remainder of flour.

=Molasses Cookies=

    ¾ cup molasses
    2 eggs
    1 cup butter
    ½ cup granulated sugar
    ½-¾ teaspn. lemon extract
    2 tablespns. browned flour
    about 3½ cups pastry flour

Heat molasses to boiling and pour slowly, stirring, over well beaten
eggs; cool; cream butter and sugar, stir in browned flour mixed with a
little of the white flour, add flavoring with eggs and molasses, then
the remainder of the flour or enough to make a not too soft dough. Set
in cold place and roll out the same as small cakes. Care must be taken
in baking, as molasses burns easily.

Or, boil and cool molasses, cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs, a
little flour, then molasses gradually, beating well, and finally, the
flour.

Browned flour may be omitted and a few drops of rose extract used in
flavoring.

=★ Molasses Cakes--no eggs=

    1¼ cup oil or butter
    2 cups molasses
    orange or lemon rind or
    coriander, anise, rose or vanilla flavoring
    pastry flour

Cream butter with a little flour, add molasses which has been boiled
and cooled, with flavoring, and flour for stiff dough, about 2¼ qts.
Mix as little as possible, cover and set in cold place for several
hours. Shape into small thick cakes, or, roll about ½ in. thick, prick
with fork or crease and cut into small cakes. Bake in moderate oven.
Remove from tins as soon as baked.

With nice flavored molasses, no other flavoring is necessary. More
shortening may be used.

=★ Molasses Snaps--no eggs=

    ½ cup oil or butter, or half of each
    1 cup sugar
    2 cups flour
    2 cups molasses
    flavoring
    more flour

Cream butter, sugar and the 2 cups of flour, pour hot molasses over,
add flavoring and flour for stiff dough, perhaps about 6 cups; press
together lightly, set in cold place for several hours; roll thin, bake
in moderately quick oven and remove from tins at once. These cakes will
be brittle when first made and will grow softer with time. One cup of
butter may be used for richer cakes.

=Nut Wafers=

    1 cup chopped English walnut, pecan or hickory nut meats
    1 cup dark brown sugar
    2 eggs
    4 level tablespns. flour
    salt

Beat eggs, add sugar gradually, beating well; then add flour, salt and
nuts. Mix, spread as thin as possible on buttered pans, set in cold
place, bake in quick oven. When nearly cold, cut into squares.

=Nut Cakes--Bro. Hurdon=

    1 cup chopped nut meats
    1 cup sugar
    1 cup flour
    1 egg

Mix, drop on well oiled tins some distance apart, bake. Remove from
tins when taken from the oven.

=Hard Sponge Cakes=

Cream together ¼ cup butter and 1 cup sugar, add 1 well beaten egg and
1 cup of flour to which has been added a pinch of salt; stir in 1 cup
chopped nut meats; drop in spoonfuls on buttered tins and flatten or
shape a little; bake in moderate oven.

=Risen Doughnuts--Baked=

  _Sponge_--

    1 cup milk
    ⅔ cake compressed yeast
    2 cups flour

Add dissolved yeast and flour to warm milk, beat well, let rise.

  _When light_--

    ½ cup sugar
    5 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    vanilla, lemon, coriander or anise for flavoring
    2-2½ cups flour
    ¼ teaspn. salt

Beat oil and sugar together with a little flour, add flavoring,
salt and light sponge, gradually, beating; then enough flour for a
moderately stiff dough; knead a little and let rise. When well risen,
roll ½ or ¾ in. thick, cut with doughnut cutter and place on floured,
oiled tins some distance apart. Let rise, bake.

Roll in sugar with or without ground coriander seed or chopped nuts
before laying on tins, if desired, or moisten with sugar syrup or white
of egg and water and roll in sugar after baking.

Another half-spoon of oil may be added to sponge, with 1 white and 2
yolks of eggs well beaten, but eggs are not necessary. If a yellow
color is desired, use a little saffron. Mix softer when eggs are used.

=Risen Doughnuts=

  _Sponge_--

    1 cup skimmed milk
    ⅔ cake compressed, or
    2 tablespns. soft yeast
    2 cups flour

  _When light_--

    3 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    ½ cup sugar
    salt
    flavouring
    yolk of 1 egg or not
    flour for rather stiff dough

Proceed as in baked doughnuts, lay on floured board, cover; when very
light, fry in cooking or olive oil, hot enough for the cakes to rise to
the top almost instantly. Turn at once with a fork. ⅓ of a cup of oil
may be used in the cakes and 1 whole well beaten egg.

Our grandmothers’ twisted doughnuts are dear to all our hearts.

Sometimes roll the dough thin, cut with biscuit cutter and put a
teaspoonful of some jelly or jam on one side, fold the other side over,
having moistened the edges, press well together, fry when light, roll
in sugar. Baked doughnuts may be prepared the same.

=Crullers=

    ⅓-½ cup butter
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    3 eggs (separate if desired)
    flour for soft dough

Mix, chill, roll thin, cut in strips 3½ in. long and 2 in. wade; cut 2
slits in each piece and give each strip of dough a twist. Fry in oil
or bake in oven. When to be fried, use the smaller quantity of butter
and sugar.

Crullers may have 4 incisions made lengthwise to within ⅓ of an in.
of each end. To fry, take up the second and fourth strips and let the
others separate in the middle from those in the hand as you drop them
into the hot oil. For baking, it is better to twist the strips.

=Fried Cakes=

    1 cup milk
    2 eggs
    ¾ cup sugar
    salt, flour
    3 tablespns. oil or melted butter

Add sugar and yolks of eggs to cold milk, agitate with wire batter
whip until full of bubbles, sprinkle flour in gradually, keeping up
the agitating motion. When the batter is quite stiff, beat in the oil
gradually, and chop in the stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Add flour for
rather stiff dough and set in cold place for 2 hrs. or longer. Shape
and fry the same as risen doughnuts.


ICINGS AND FILLINGS FOR CAKES

Starch, which is changed into sugar in the process of digestion,
and cane sugar, form so large a part of all cakes as to furnish in
themselves an excess of that element; so why should we put a coating
of almost solid sugar over the outside? Certainly not for hygienic
reasons. If a cake is well baked, the icing only hides its beauty, and
the excessive sweetness destroys the flavors of the finest cake. Let us
not use it. Protest and recipes are both given.

Instead of icing, sometimes sift granulated, brown or powdered sugar
over the top of the loaf of cake, or over one layer to be used for the
top, before baking.

Glaze the top of molasses cookies or cakes before baking with a mixture
of 1 yolk of egg and 2 tablespns. of milk.

Sprinkle half a cup of chopped or ground blanched almonds or other nuts
over the top of the cake just before it goes into the oven, and cover
the cake until nearly done to prevent browning the nuts.

The tops of cakes may be brushed after baking with equal parts of
molasses and milk mixed.

=Water Icing=

The simplest of icings is granulated, powdered or xxxx confectioner’s
sugar formed into a paste so that it will run just smooth, by the
addition of hot or cold water. That made from granulated sugar must be
made with hot water and be pretty stiff. It takes longer to dry and is
more likely to run; that from powdered sugar is also quite likely to
run. The icing made from confectioner’s sugar is the most satisfactory.
It is usually made with cold water, but one authority recommends hot
water very positively.

One recipe for granulated sugar frosting is--

1 cup sugar, 1 tablespn. boiling water, beat until it will spread.

=Fruit Juice Icing=

Stir rolled and sifted confectioner’s sugar into any desired fruit
juice until of the right consistency to spread; use a knife dipped in
cold water to smooth the icing; 1-1½ tablespn. of liquid will be enough
for the top of a medium sized loaf of cake.

If you have never made such an icing, you will be surprised to see how
much sugar a little liquid will take. More icing is quickly made if you
do not have enough.

When juices of different fruits are used in their season, the top of
the cake may be decorated with the fruit whole, in halves or in slices.
For instance, slices from the heart of strawberries, or, halves of red
raspberries. The fruit may also be placed between the layers of the
cake.

=Cream Icing=

Stir confectioner’s sugar into cream, plain or whipped, for both
filling and icing.

If you have a little of these icings left over, cover it and set in a
cold place, and add more liquid and sugar to it the next time.

=White of Egg Icing--Miss Stokes=

    white of 1 egg
    1 tablespn. ice water
    speck of salt
    1 cup confectioner’s sugar
    flavoring

Beat white of egg with water, flavoring and salt to a stiff dry froth;
add sugar until of the right consistency to spread, if too stiff, add
quickly 1 teaspn. of cream or a few drops of water.

The icing is sometimes made by mixing the water and egg without beating
and stirring the sugar in, making a smoother and more tender frosting.
May use powdered sugar.

=White of Egg Icing with Lemon Juice=

    white of 1 egg
    1 cup powdered sugar
    1 tablespn. lemon juice
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Put the white of egg into a bowl and add the sugar by degrees, beating;
when the sugar is all in, add lemon juice and vanilla.

=Golden Icing=

Yolks of 2 or 3 eggs and powdered sugar to make stiff enough to spread,
about 1 cupful for 3 yolks; vanilla or orange flavoring or both. Beat
until thick and creamy.

For an orange cake, use the juice and grated rind of a small orange
to 3 yolks with the powdered sugar, and use for filling and icing.
Sections of orange may be laid on top. Confectioner’s sugar may be used.

=★ Butter Frosting--almost like whipped cream=

Work together 1 cup confectioner’s sugar and 1 level tablespn. of
butter. Flavor with vanilla. Add 1¼-1½ tablespn. of milk. Beat well.

=Jelly Icing=

Beat a glass of jelly, a little at a time, into the whites of 2 eggs.
If the jelly is very tart, use 2-3 tablespns. powdered sugar. Prepare
the icing some little time before it is to be used and set on ice.
Elder-berry jelly gives a delightful flavor and beautiful color. Quince
is also nice.

=Boiled Icing=

    1 cup granulated sugar
    ⅓ cup water
    white of 1 egg
    ½ teaspn. vanilla, or the proper proportion of any desired flavoring

Stir sugar and water together over the fire until sugar is dissolved,
then boil without stirring until the syrup will spin in threads when
dropped from the tines of a fork, or until a hard ball is formed when
dropped into cold water. Pour slowly over the stiffly-beaten white of
egg, beating briskly, until stiff enough to spread. If the icing gets
too stiff, set over hot water or thin with a trifle of lemon or other
fruit juice, or hot water. ½-1 teaspn. of lemon juice added to the
white of egg when about half beaten will make the icing more creamy.
Some beat the white of egg slightly, only.

2 or 3 whites may be used with this quantity of syrup. One writes that
she turns her syrup on to a platter and allows it to become perfectly
cold before beating in the eggs, and she thinks it is much smoother and
nicer.

One combination of flavors is, ¼ teaspn. each vanilla, orange and
strawberry, or 1 or 2 drops of rose in place of strawberry.

Bro. Cornforth’s directions are excellent: “Boil the sugar and water
till it threads well, not just till it begins to thread; then set the
dish off the stove and cover tight while you beat the whites stiff;
then pour the hot syrup in a small stream into the whites, beating
continuously; beat till it becomes cool enough to spread on the cake.”

=Boiled Milk Icing--no egg=

    1 cup granulated sugar
    4 tablespns. milk, with or
    without a little butter
    or 1½ cup sugar and ½ cup milk

Boil 5 m., or until syrup stiffens in cold water; stir until thick
enough to spread.

=Caramel Icing--no egg=

1½ cup brown sugar, ½ cup cream. Boil until syrup stiffens when
dropped in water. Substitute ⅔ cup sour cream for sweet, with brown or
granulated sugar.

=Boiled Maple Icing--no egg=

Add ¾ cup sweet cream to 2 cups rolled or grated maple sugar. Boil
slowly until mixture will thread. Cool about half, stir in ½ cup
chopped English walnut meats, beat until creamy, and spread over cake.

Half granulated sugar may be used, and ½ cup of milk with a little
butter substituted for the cream.

=Maple Syrup Icing and Filling=

Boil ¾-1 cup of maple syrup until it will form a soft ball in cold
water. Pour over beaten white of egg. Beat until stiff enough to
spread. If desired, stir in ½ cup of rolled butternut meats just before
spreading on the cake. The syrup may be boiled until it threads.

=Whipped Cream=

Flavored with vanilla is delightful, of course, on the top of thin
loaves of cake cut in squares. Or, for filling, with chopped, blanched
almonds, dry, fine-cut stewed prunes, or slices of banana.

Molasses cake baked in layers, with whipped cream between the layers
and over the top, with or without a sprinkling of grated cocoanut, is
considered a great treat in some households.

=Cocoanut Cream=

    1 cup cream, whipped.
    ⅓ cup sugar
    1½ cup fresh grated cocoanut

Two layers and on top of cake, with cocoanut sprinkled over top. Some
additional flavoring if desired.

=Butternut Filling=

1 cup sweet cream, ½-¾ cup sugar and 1 cup rolled butternut meats,
mixed without whipping cream. Flavoring if desired.

=★ Sour Cream Filling=

Before I gave up cake I used to think this filling had no equal:

    ½ cup thick sour cream
    ½ cup sugar
    1½ cup chopped blanched almonds
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Whip cream (ice-cold), sugar and vanilla together until just thick,
taking care not to whip too long as sour cream turns to butter more
easily than sweet; add the almonds, spread quickly between layers of
cake and roughly on top. The nuts may be sprinkled over the layers
of cream instead of being mixed with it. The white of an egg beaten
stiff with part of the sugar is sometimes added to the whipped cream.
Shellbark, English walnut or rolled butternut meats may be substituted
for almonds.

=Creamed Apple=

White of 1 large egg, 1½ cup granulated, powdered or confectioner’s
sugar, 2 or 3 medium sized apples. Peel apples and grate on to unbeaten
white of egg and sugar in large bowl; beat for 20 m.; or until light
and creamy. Lemon, rose or strawberry may be used if flavoring is
desired. Spread between layers and on top of cold cake. Bananas,
peaches and other fruits rubbed through a fine colander may be used the
same as apples.

Steamed quarters of apples may be used.

=Cocoanut Filling=

Spread under and upper sides of layers of warm cake with soft icing.
Sprinkle tops with fresh grated cocoanut and put other layers on. Use
plenty of icing on top of last layer and sprinkle well with cocoanut.

=Date Filling=

Stone and skin dates after boiling a moment, mash or grind them, and
add water if necessary; spread between layers of cake. Cover the top of
the cake with coffee icing with cream. Chopped nuts may be mixed with
the dates and sprinkled over the top of the cake.

=Pineapple Filling and Icing=

Chop fresh pineapple and sprinkle with sugar; drain after 3 or 4 hrs;
add beaten whites of 2 eggs, ⅔ cup sugar and 1 teaspn. lemon juice to 1
cup of pineapple and place between layers. Use some of the juice with
confectioner’s sugar for icing the top and sides of the cake. When
using confectioner’s sugar with pineapple omit whites of eggs.

Drain canned pineapple very dry, chop and add lemon juice and
confectioner’s sugar, when fresh pineapple is not obtainable.

=Imperial Filling=

Spread layers of cake with jelly and the following:

  _Filling_--

    1 cup chopped raisins
    ½ cup chopped almonds
    ½ cup grated cocoanut
    white of 1 egg

Beat white stiff, add other ingredients and spread.

=Coffee Icing=

Add confectioner’s sugar and vanilla to strong cereal coffee, with or
without a little heavy cream.

=Fig Jelly Filling=

    1 lb. figs, chopped fine
    1 cup sugar
    ½ cup boiling water

Boil to a jelly, stirring constantly, or cook in double boiler until
thick.

=Prune Filling=

Stew ½ lb. of prunes in a very little water, rub through colander
or cut fine, add whites of 2 eggs beaten to a stiff froth with 2
tablespns. of sugar.

=Nut and Raisin Filling=

    1½ cup sugar
    ½ cup water
    white of 1 large or 2 small eggs
    1 cup each of chopped or ground raisins and nut meats
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Boil sugar and water till the syrup will form a soft ball in cold
water; pour it into the stiffly-beaten white of egg, add nuts and
raisins and spread while warm between the layers.

Raisins or nuts alone may be used. Shellbarks or butternuts are
especially enjoyable. Figs or dates may be substituted for the raisins
or for the nuts.

=★ Cream Filling=

    1 cup milk
    ⅓-½ cup sugar
    2¼ tablespns. (¼ cup) flour
    1 egg or 2 yolks, or 1 egg and yolk of another
    ½ teaspn. vanilla

Mix sugar and flour dry, pour boiling milk over, boil up, turn over
beaten eggs, stirring, return to fire and heat until creamy but do not
boil; set dish at once into cold water, add flavoring.

Use ½ tablespn. less of flour for Washington Pie, and ¼ cream (or a
small piece of butter) in the milk.

½ cup of flour is sometimes used. Add cocoanut for a cocoanut cake.

=Royal Filling and Icing=

    ¼ cup milk
    ¼ cup orange juice
    ¼ cup flour
    ½ cup sugar
    yolk of 1 egg
    oil from rind of half an orange
    6 drops vanilla
    1 drop rose

Flavor sugar with oil of orange, make cream according to directions for
cream filling and add rose and vanilla when partly cool. Icing of cream
and confectioner’s sugar, tinted with pink.

I have usually used this for Royal Sponge Cake and this quantity is
sufficient for one large layer.

=Filling for Lemon Pie Cake and Washington Pie=

    ¾-1 cup sugar
    1½ tablespn. corn starch or 2 of flour
    1 teaspn. butter
    1 cup water
    yolk 1 egg
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    2-6 drops lemon extract or grated rind of ½ a lemon
    salt

Mix sugar and corn starch or flour, drop the teaspoon of butter on and
pour the boiling water over gradually, stirring; boil up well and add
2 or 3 tablespns. to the yolk of egg stirring; then add yolk to the
mixture and cook like custard. Remove from fire and when partially
cooled add flavoring. Use sometimes for the filling of a cake with
whipped cream on the top.

=Lemon Cheese for Cakes=

    ¼ cup butter
    ¾ cup sugar
    2 whites and 3 yolks of egg
    3 tablespns. lemon juice
    grated rind of 1 lemon

Cook in double boiler, cool, spread between layers of sponge or other
cake or on crisp pastry, or put it into cream puff shells; or, without
cooking put into pastry in patty pans and bake in moderate oven.

=Marshmallow Filling=

1 oz. (about 4 tablespns.) sifted powdered gum arabic, 4 tablespns.
water, ½ cup sugar, whites 3 eggs, 1 teaspn. vanilla. Soak gum arabic
in water for 1 hour, add sugar, cook in double boiler ½ hour, add
stiffly-beaten whites of eggs and vanilla, beat until stiff and white.

Nice for 2 or 3-days old angel cake split in halves or thirds.

[Illustration: THE “LADY BALTIMORE” CAKE AND BREAD PAN.]




ICE CREAM AND FRUIT ICES


Neither very hot nor very cold foods should be taken at meals. If foods
are too hot, the stomach is debilitated, and if they are very cold,
vitality must be drawn from the system to warm them before the work of
digestion can be carried on; so it would be better to take ice cream
and all ices by themselves rather than as a dessert.

When ices are served for dessert, they should be eaten very slowly.

Water ices, sherbets and frozen fruits, without large quantities of
sugar, are invaluable in cases of fever.

I am not going into the subject of ice cream exhaustively for there
are plenty of books on that subject already, but will give you my own
recipe which must be tried to be appreciated.

The little flour in it gives it a smoothness and creaminess with one
third to one half milk equal to all cream without it; and does not give
the disagreeable flavor of corn starch; also, made by this method, the
cream and milk are sterilized.

Try the cream without any flavoring and see how delicious it is.

Use wet snow instead of ice for freezing in the winter. It works even
better and is less trouble.

Beat the cream well with a wooden spoon after removing the dasher.

Add fruit or nuts to cream when removing the dasher, so that they will
not become hard as they would do if frozen with the cream.

For freezing, have the ingredients cold. Have the ice very fine; the
finer it is, the better the results. One-third as much rock salt should
be at hand. The ice and salt may be mixed, or may be put around the
freezer in the proportion of 3 inches of ice to 1 inch of salt.

First, adjust the freezer, having the mixture to be frozen in the can.
Fill not over ⅔ full to allow for expansion. Then pack with the ice and
salt, turning the handle around once in a while during the operation,
to keep the mixture from freezing to the sides of the can. Have a stick
to pound the ice and salt down well around the can.

Turn slowly at first to make a fine grain, then more rapidly as the
cream thickens.

Before removing the cover to take out the dasher, scrape away the ice
and salt and wipe off the water on the lid and near the top of the
can, so that none can possibly get into the cream. Beat the cream and
replace the cover, with a clean cork in the top. Drain off a part of
the water and repack the can, using less salt than at first, sometimes
not any, so as not to have the cream too hard. To be at its best, cream
should be stiff enough only to hold its shape. Cover with paper, a
blanket or carpet and let stand to “ripen” for 2 hours or longer. This
part is important, as the flavor and texture are perfected only by
standing.

If possible, open the can in an hour and a half and stir the cream so
that the soft center comes to the edge of the can. Repack and cover the
same and let stand for 2 or 3 hours.

Save the salt from the bottom of the freezer to use another time, and
it is a good plan to save a little of the thick salt water to use
instead of the last layer of salt near the top of the can for the next
freezing, as it facilitates the work very much.

In serving, dip the spoon into hot water each time before putting it
into the cream; this, with care, will give a nice shaped serving.

Pop corn without butter or salt is more suitable to serve with ice
cream than cake.

Sugar syrup gives a finer, smoother and more substantial grain to
frozen fruits, sherbets and water ices than sugar and water, and they
do not melt as quickly when exposed to the air.

Pack all ices the same as creams and let stand the same after freezing,
to become smooth and mellow.

For water ices, do not turn the crank continuously. Turn slowly and
rest between, until the ice becomes quite stiff. This is the rule, but
for a change the freezer may be turned rapidly and continuously, with a
different result.

Stir sherbets constantly. Serve both sherbets and water ices in glasses.

Vegetable gelatine is an improvement to ices, giving body to them.

There is a great difference in freezers. Be sure to get a good one.
The construction of the dasher has much to do with the texture of the
cream. Those that freeze the quickest are not necessarily the best.

Do not buy a small freezer: you can freeze a small quantity in a large
freezer, but you cannot freeze a large quantity in a small freezer.

=★ The “Laurel” Ice Cream=

    2½ pts. heavy cream
    2½ pts. whole milk
    2 cups sugar
    4 or 5 tablespns. pastry flour

Stir the flour smooth with some of the cold milk and heat the remainder
of the milk, with the cream and sugar, in a double boiler and when hot,
set over the fire. Let it boil up quickly, stir in the flour and when
boiling all through, return to the double boiler for a few minutes,
beating well. Or, heat the milk and cream only in the double boiler
and pour gradually, stirring, over the sugar and flour which have been
mixed together. Return to boiler and cook for 10-15 m. Turn through a
fine wire strainer into a large pan to cool quickly; stir while cooling.

Do not take too large measures of flour.

Any kind of cream may be made from this. Flavor with vanilla for
vanilla cream, or tint pink and flavor with ¾-1 teaspn. of strawberry
extract for strawberry cream, or with a few drops of rose, for rose
cream. Tint green and flavor with almond and vanilla for pistachio
cream, using only a few drops of almond to a teaspn. of vanilla. This
may have a few shredded almonds stirred into the frozen cream.

Sometimes sprinkle fresh grated cocoanut over each serving of cream, or
the cocoanut may be stirred in as other flavorings are.

A very pretty cream is one with citron and candied cherries cut into
tiny pieces and added when the dasher is removed.

We make a fruit and nut cream which is liked very much, by adding well
washed English currants, raisins cut in quarters, citron in small
pieces and coarse chopped English walnuts or pecans. Omit the nuts for
a fruit cream.

For coffee cream, steep (not boil) cereal coffee in milk for 10 to 20
m. Strain through a cloth and use as plain milk with the cream. Flavor
with vanilla.

One quart of sweetened, crushed strawberries or raspberries added
to the recipe makes the right proportion for fruit cream. Drained,
finely-shredded or grated pineapple makes a general favorite in cream.

=Maple Ice Cream=

    1 qt. genuine maple syrup
    1 qt. heavy cream
    1 qt. light cream
    ¾ qt. milk
    7 tablespns. flour

=Lemon Ice=

    8-12 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 orange
    2½ cups sugar
    1 qt. water including the gelatine
    ⅛ oz. vegetable gelatine

Soak and cook gelatine according to directions (p. 335), add water to
make 1 cup, keep warm; cook sugar and 3 cups of water together for 5
minutes and strain into the gelatine. Prepare the lemon and orange
juice, and if desired, shave off a little of the thin yellow rind and
let it stand in the juice for a few minutes, then strain it out. When
the gelatine mixture is partially cooled, add the juice gradually,
stirring. The orange may be omitted.

Or, omit gelatine, boil sugar with 1 qt. of water and when cool combine
with the juice.

=Orange Ice=

    1 pt. sugar
    1 qt. water
    1 pt. of orange juice
    6-8 tablespns. lemon juice
    ⅛ oz. vegetable gelatine

Flavor juice with thin yellow rind of orange and proceed as in lemon
ice, omitting gelatine if preferred.

=Raspberry Ice=

    1 cup raspberry juice
    ¾ cup sugar (less if juice is already sweetened)
    1 pt. water
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 sixteenth oz. vegetable gelatine, or not

Cook sugar and water together and add to prepared gelatine. When nearly
cool, add raspberry juice and stir occasionally until cool. Freeze.

=Currant and Raspberry Ice=

    2 cups currant juice
    1 cup raspberry juice
    1 pt. water
    1-1½ cup sugar
    ⅛ oz. gelatine, or not

Proceed as in Raspberry Ice.

Use cherry, strawberry, quince, gooseberry, grape or pineapple for
ices, varying the proportion of sugar and water according to the
sweetness of the fruit. Pineapples should be grated and with the lemon
juice added to cold syrup and strained through a sieve. Pineapple is
one of the most delightful ices.

=Mint Ice=

Add fine cut or chopped spearmint to lemon ice mixture just before
freezing, or to orange ice for orange mint ice.

=★ Grape Sherbet=

    1½-1¾ cup sugar
    1 qt. water, scant
    scant ¼ oz. vegetable gelatine
    5-6 tablespns. lemon juice
    2 cups grape juice
    whites of 2 eggs
    2 tablespns. powdered sugar

Flavor the sugar with oil of lemon if desired, and boil with the water
for 5 m. only. Prepare the gelatine with a scant cup of water, and add
to warm syrup; cool; add lemon and grape juice, stirring. Put into
freezer and stir for 15 m. Beat the whites of eggs until light but not
stiff; add the powdered sugar and beat 2 m., add to the sherbet in the
freezer and finish freezing. Ripen from 2 to 4 hours. This sherbet is
of a beautiful lavender color when finished.

Substitute other fruit juices for the grape, varying the quantity of
sugar. Red raspberry is better in water ice, as the whites of the eggs
spoil its flavor.

=★ Mint Sherbet=

    1 qt. water
    1½ cup sugar
    5-7 good-sized stalks of mint
    ⅓-½ cup lemon juice
    white of 1 large or 2 small eggs
    1½ tablespn. powdered sugar
    scant ¼ oz. vegetable gelatine
    scant cup of water

Boil sugar and water and add to gelatine prepared with the scant cup of
water. When cool, add stirring, the lemon juice and fine cut or chopped
mint. Stir in freezer 15 m. Add whites of eggs beaten with powdered
sugar as in grape sherbet and finish freezing. Ripen.

=Pineapple Sherbet, or Frozen Pineapple=

    1¾ pint fine ground pineapple
    large 2½ cups sugar
    1 qt. liquid, gelatine and all
    ¼ oz. gelatine
    1½-2 tablespns. lemon juice
    whites of 2 eggs
    2 tablespns. powdered sugar

Shred and grind nice, ripe pineapples. Prepare gelatine with 1 cup of
water and add more to make 1½ cup. Cook sugar and 2½ cups of water
together for 5 m. and add to gelatine. When nearly cool, combine with
pineapple and lemon juice; cool; stir in freezer for 15 m. Add whites
of eggs beaten with powdered sugar and finish freezing. Ripen.

=Mina’s Lemon and Orange Sherbets=

  _Lemon_--

    4 lemons
    4 oranges
    1 lb. sugar
    1 qt. water
    whites of 4, or less, eggs
    ⅛ oz. of vegetable gelatine

  _Orange_--

    10 oranges
    1 lemon
    1 pt. sugar
    1 qt. water
    whites of 4, or less, eggs
    ⅛ oz. vegetable gelatine

Follow directions for Grape Sherbet.

=Frozen Strawberries=

    1 qt. berries
    2 cups sugar
    3 or 4 tablespns. lemon juice
    1 qt. water

Add 1 cup of sugar and the lemon juice to well mashed berries. Let
stand in ice box 1-2 hours. Boil water and remaining sugar together for
5 m., cool, add to berry mixture, freeze, ripen. Serve plain or with
whipped cream.

=Frozen Peaches=

    1 qt., in pieces, of nice ripe peaches
    1-1½ cup sugar
    1 qt. water
    1-2 cups cream

Rub measured peaches through colander; add cold syrup made by boiling
sugar and water together for 10 m. Freeze. Stir in cream whipped and
slightly sweetened, when dasher is removed. Repack and ripen.

=Frappés=

Frappés are partly frozen mixtures of fruit juices, pulps or fine
grated fruits and when not too sweet are excellent in fevers and are
often served in place of a drink or a sherbet to well people. Of course
they are served in glasses.




CEREALS


“The grains, with fruits, nuts and vegetables contain all the nutritive
properties necessary to make good blood.”

“Those who eat flesh are eating grains and vegetables at second-hand;
for the animal receives from these things the nutrition that produces
growth.”

“The life that was in the grains and vegetables passes into the eater.
We receive it by eating the flesh of the animal. How much better to get
it direct, by eating the food that God provided for our use.”

“Grains used for porridge or mush should have several hours’ cooking;
but soft or liquid foods are less wholesome than dry foods which
require thorough mastication.”

When porridges are used, something dry like zwieback or crisp crackers
should be eaten with them to induce mastication.

Foods containing starch should be well insalivated by thorough
mastication before any tart foods are introduced into the stomach, as
acid hinders the digestion of starch.

The large proportion of starch contained in grains is changed to sugar
in the process of digestion, so the addition of more sugar gives
an excess of that element, overtaxing the liver and increasing the
tendency to fermentation, since both starch and sugar are substances
that ferment easily. Then if milk, another easily fermented food, is
added what can be said of the combination? Besides: “the presence
of a considerable amount of sugar actually retards the digestion of
starch.”--_Dr. Kress._

For those who feel that they cannot at once forego the sweet, stir in a
few sliced dates to graham porridge or sprinkle them over the top and
serve with nut or dairy cream. Chopped figs or stewed raisins may also
be used the same with different cereals. A very harmonious combination
is pearled barley cooked with raisins. Nice ripe blueberries or black
raspberries may be served with cereals.

A complete meal may be made of graham or any preferred porridge,
blanched almonds, English walnuts or pecans, with dates, figs or
raisins. The combination will be satisfying without any milk or cream.

My readers will many of them be surprised to find that oatmeal and some
other porridges are delightful served with cream sauce, old-fashioned
milk gravy, macaroni sauce and other gravies; the cooked parched grains
especially so. A poached egg may be placed on each serving of porridge,
with or without sauce.

Raw rice may be ground coarse or fine for different purposes.

The parched grains may be served with suitable, sub-acid fruits.

The toasted breakfast cereals on the market, prepared without malt or
any additional sweet are many of them excellent foods because of the
dextrinization of the starch, and we can easily prepare dextrinized
grains in our own homes.

=Parched Sweet Corn--the Ideal Cereal Preparation=

Put dried sweet corn into a corn popper, iron frying pan or round
bottomed iron kettle; cover, and shake over the fire until the grains
are browned and puffed up nearly round. Served plain, this corn
supplies a complete and satisfying food, as any one will find who sits
down with a nice fresh-parched porridge dish of it and chews it until
it is fine and creamy in the mouth. It is much more delicious than the
finest popcorn. It may be ground and eaten in cold or hot milk, nut or
dairy, and it may have a little salt and sterilized butter mixed with
it while it is warm. A cup of cereal coffee or tea-hygiene with a dish
of parched corn makes a nice luncheon or supper.

The corn may be dried on the cob or shelled and dried. It may often be
bought from dealers in seeds, after the planting season is over.

Parched field corn is a good nourishing food but not so sweet and
tender. It is usually better to be ground.

One doctor says, “I could travel the world around on parched corn and
never want grease of any kind.”

It is well understood that corn and oatmeal are the richest in oil of
any of the grains. In some countries the soldiers carry parched corn in
their pockets on long marches.

=Yolk--Egg=

Put yellow corn meal into an iron kettle or saucepan over a moderate
fire; stir until of an even rich brown color. Serve warm or cold with
hot or cold milk or cream. The donor of this recipe says: “When I was
a child this was considered a great dainty, but I do not know how it
obtained its name or where we learned to make it.”

The different preparations of grains may all be parched the same as
sweet corn and corn meal in the preceding recipes. If more convenient
they may be done in the oven but the flavor is not as good. Some of
them are tender enough to be eaten dry or in milk without any further
preparation; others are better to be ground before adding the milk or
cream, and some need to stand in the milk, hot or cold, for a time,
before serving, while others (rice especially) require cooking after
parching. Some are better cooked in milk.

=Pop-corn=

To pop: “Wet the corn slightly and let it dry on the stove; put it in
the popper while it is hot and in four minutes every kernel should be
turned inside out, crisp and tender.”--_From a clipping._

Serve the popped kernels plain with nuts, cereal coffee, tea-hygiene,
cream or milk, or sprinkle delicately with salt and turn a little oil
or melted butter over, mixing thoroughly.

Put together the poorly popped kernels of corn and all the remains,
cover with cold water and soak until soft, perhaps over night. Then
add milk and cook in a double boiler ½ hour or so. Serve with cream or
more milk if necessary, or, cook in all water and serve with cream.
These left-overs may be ground and soaked in milk until soft.

=Rusk=

Dry slices or pieces of bread in the oven and brown delicately, grind
through the food cutter and serve in milk or with cream.

=Porridges=

“Some people degrade these foods by calling them mushes, a horrible
name, by the way; the good English word porridge is much better, and
porridge is not gruel.”--_An Editor._

Unless cereals are steamed, they should be cooked in a double boiler or
something that answers the same purpose.

A flat or round wire batter whip is the best for stirring the grain
into the water, as that keeps even the finest flour from becoming lumpy.

The very most important thing in making porridges is to have the liquid
boiling when the cereal is put in. If it stops boiling while the grain
is being added there will be a raw taste to the porridge, no matter how
long it cooks.

Put the required amount of water, with the salt, 1 teaspn. to a quart
of water, into the inner cup of a double boiler. Heat the water to
bubbling boiling, sprinkle the measured grain in so slowly as not to
stop the boiling of the water, stirring continuously. Let it boil up
well, and if a coarse grain, cook over the fire until it thickens, then
set into the outer boiler containing perfectly boiling water and keep
it cooking rapidly the required length of time.

Do not stir after the grain thickens. Watch that the outer boiler does
not become dry. Grains for breakfast may be cooked while you have a
fire the day before, then all that is necessary in the morning is
to set the inner boiler into the outer one containing boiling water
and heat it through. If there should be water standing on top of
the porridge, pour it off before heating, but under no circumstances
stir the porridge, or add any more water while heating, or a pasty,
tasteless dish will be the result.

When the porridge is to be re-heated, a slightly larger proportion of
water should be used, and for steaming, a smaller quantity.

One advantage in steaming is that the cereal (after being started over
the fire in some suitable utensil) can be turned into an earthen dish
and set into the steamer, warmed in the morning and sent to the table
in the same dish.

Farina, cream of wheat and similar cereals are more palatable and
nourishing if cooked in part milk. These finer preparations may have
milk or cream stirred into them just before serving.

=Proportion of Water and Length of Time for Cooking Different Cereals=

  Graham Flour     1 part to 2 or 3     of water      cook 1-2 hrs.
  Rolled Wheat     1 part to 2 or 3     of water      cook 3-4 hrs.
  Cracked Wheat    1 part to 4½ or 5    of water      cook 4-6 hrs.
  Pearled Wheat    1 part to 4 or 4½    of water      cook 4-6 hrs.
  Whole Wheat      1 part to 6          of water      cook 6-8 hrs.
  Rolled Oats      1 part to 2 or 3     of water      cook 3-4 hrs.
  Oatmeal          1 part to 4 or 4½    of water      cook 4-6 hrs.
  Pearled Barley   1 part to 5          of water      cook 4-5 hrs.
  Hominy, coarse   1 part to 5          of water      cook 6-8 hrs.
  Hominy, fine     1 part to 4 or 5     of water      cook 4-6 hrs.
  Corn Meal        1 part to 3 or 5     of water      cook 2-5 hrs.
  Rice             1 part to 3 or 4     of water       25 m.-1¼ hr.
  Farina           5 tablespns. to 1 qt.  liquid              1 hr.

Different lots of graham flour and rolled oats vary, so that it is not
possible to make an exact rule for them, but graham flour should be
stirred into water until the mixture is quite stiff because it grows
thinner by cooking.

Rye meal makes one of the most delightful porridges. Stir the meal
slowly into boiling salted water, the same as graham flour, and cook
for 1 hour at least.

Whole wheat is a very satisfying and inexpensive food. Some families
buy it by the bushel and use large quantities of it in different ways.
Some put the boiled wheat into bread sponge before mixing it up.

Different kinds of corn meal vary, too. Only about ⅔ or ¾ as much
granular meal is required for a given amount of liquid as of other
kinds.

Oatmeal is difficult of digestion, is apt to cause fermentation and
should be partaken of sparingly even when well cooked, except by those
of strong digestive powers. One young man said in my presence, “I never
know I have a stomach except when I eat oatmeal.”

Cracked wheat is very nice cooked with an extra quantity of water,
molded and served cold.

With a Vegetarian Society mill delightful cracked wheat and many other
cereal foods can be made.

Cracked corn--samp grits--hominy, is a valuable food. Besides the
package preparations I have bought it at feed stores in the East and
obtained it from the mills in the West, and with a mill it can be made
at home. It should be thoroughly cooked. The old-fashioned way is to
put it into a round bottomed iron kettle with salt and plenty of water
(adding more water when necessary) and cook it all day. It may be
served with milk, butter or gravy, or with any of the sauces used for
macaroni, and may be cooked with tomato and onion the same as pilau, p.
131.


RICE

“Rice is the most easily digested of all the cereals. The Japanese,
famous for their athletic superiority and wonderful endurance, use
rice unpolished. The rice of commerce is not only stripped of much
of its most desirable qualities, but in order to make it attractive
it is coated with glucose and talc to produce the pearly appearance.
Persons using such rice should be careful to wash it thoroughly. After
once eating unpolished rice, the rice of commerce will never again be
accepted. To eat polished rice is like eating shavings instead of real,
satisfying substance.”--_Henry S. Clubb, President Vegetarian Society
of America, in “Life and Health,” and “The Vegetarian.”_

Wash commercial rice in several waters, scrubbing it thoroughly with
the hands, in a colander set in a pan of water, rinsing the colander up
and down. Then put it over the fire in cold water, boil for 5 m. and
drain, before cooking after any of the methods.


To Boil Rice

After washing and parboiling rice, throw it into 3 or 4 times its bulk
of boiling salted water, stir it over a hot fire until it rolls up in
the rapidly boiling water. Let it boil in this way until it swells,
then set into the outer boiler or on the back of the stove on a pad
until it is perfectly tender. If rice is cooked in a double boiler, use
the smaller quantity of water, and the larger if cooked altogether over
the fire. Do not stir after it begins to swell. This is practically the
Japanese method.

Another Japanese way is to soak the rice over night, drain and put to
cooking in an equal quantity of boiling water, keeping closely covered
all of the time.


Chinese Way of Cooking Rice

After washing, put rice over the fire in double its bulk of cold water,
let it boil up well, carefully lift cover to see if water is all
absorbed; if not, drain, sprinkle salt over if desired (the Chinaman
does not use it), return to fire closely covered and watch, listening
until a faint crackling of parching grains at the bottom is heard; then
remove to the back of the range where the rice will just steam--“steam
fragrant.” When ready to serve, carefully stir the grain with a wooden
skewer or some small round stick, when the snowy mass should crumble
apart into indistinct kernels. “Try the Chinaman’s way and be convinced
that plain boiled rice is a palatable, substantial food.”--_Adapted
from Mrs. J. N. Anderson, Canton, China, in “Life and Health.”_


The Indian Way

Wash the rice, put little by little into 8 times its bulk (2 qts. to a
cup) of rapidly boiling salted water. Stir occasionally at first with a
fork until the rice is rolling up continuously from the rapid boiling.
Cook until tender, 15-25 m., according to the age and quality of the
rice. Be sure to cook it until it is tender but not a moment longer.
Drain in a fine colander, pour cold water over to separate the kernels,
put into the dish in which it is to be served and set in a steamer or
in the edge of the oven for a half hour. The water drained from the
rice may be used for soup.


To Steam Rice

After washing, soak 1 cup of rice in 1¼ cup of warm water for an hour
or longer, in a dish suitable for serving it in. Add 1 level teaspn. of
salt and 1 cup of milk and steam, without stirring, for just 1 hour.
Serve at once, or if it has to stand, cover close so that the top
kernels will not become hard.

All milk may be used by taking 2¾-3 cups. If the milk fills the dish
so that it is just ready to run over, the rice when steamed will stand
snowy white above the top of the dish.

=★ Baked Rice=

A nice supper or luncheon dish or dessert.

    ½-¾ cup rice
    ½ teaspn. salt
    2 qts. rich milk

Parboil rice 5 m. and drain, add it to milk in pudding dish, stir even
in bottom of dish, set in slow oven, cover and bake 2-3 hrs. without
stirring, or until milk is all thickened and creamy with rice; if
the milk boils over under the cover, the oven is too hot. This is so
delicious that it does not require anything additional in eating but it
may be served with sugar, maple sugar or syrup.

=Parched Rice=

Wash if commercial rice, spread on tin and put in warm place to dry.
When thoroughly dried, put in slow oven and color to an even light
brown. Soak for 1 hour in an equal quantity of lukewarm water, then add
3 times the quantity of rich milk, with or without 1 level teaspn. salt
to the cup of rice; steam, or cook in double boiler for 1 hour. Serve
plain. The rice may be ground.

=Granella--to Serve=

Pour just enough hot water over granella to moisten it a trifle. Mix
lightly and serve with cream. Granella is nice in hot milk.

=Baked Hominy=

    1 cup cold, fine hominy porridge
    1 teaspn. butter
    1 teaspn. sugar
    1 pt. milk
    salt
    3 eggs

Mix hominy and yolks of eggs thoroughly; add melted butter, then sugar
and salt and the milk gradually, mixing hominy to smooth paste. Chop in
stiffly-beaten whites and bake in buttered dish in moderate oven. Serve
as vegetable for dinner or as principal dish for luncheon or supper.

=To Hull Corn=

2 gallons cold water, 1 tablespn. concentrated lye or potash, 4 qts.
corn, white corn if possible. Dissolve lye in water, add corn, and
boil (adding water to keep covered) until the hulls will rub off. Wash
and rub in several clear waters until the hulls are all off. Soak over
night or for several hours in cold water; drain and put to cooking
in boiling water. Cook until tender, all day if necessary. Add salt
a little while before it is done, then cook until as dry as possible
without scorching. Serve as a vegetable, plain, or with cream or cream
sauce. Eat in milk or with nut meats.

The hulled corn may be dried. Hard wood ashes may be used to make the
lye for cooking the corn, or a bag containing 2 cups of ashes may be
boiled in the kettle with the corn. By boiling for 4 hrs., the hulls
may be removed by using 1 tablespn. of soda to each 4 qts. of corn.
Some prefer strong lime water for hulling.

Instead of soaking over night, the corn may be parboiled in 2 waters
before cooking.

=★ Granella No. 1--wheat, corn and oats=

    ½ lb. (2 cups) bread flour
    1 oz. (scant ½ cup) rolled oats
    ½ oz. (1½ tablespn.) common yellow corn meal
    trifle salt
    about ⅝ cup cold water

Mix dry ingredients and to ¾ of the quantity add water for a stiff
dough, then work in the remaining ¼ until almost too stiff to knead;
roll and pound out to ¼ or ⅓ inch thick, cut in round or square biscuit
and set in cold place for 2 hours or more. Bake in a slow oven until a
rich cream color or golden brown all through. Then grind coarse or fine
as desired.

When oat _flour_ is used, ⅓ of a cup only will be required.

It will take 2 tablespns. of Rhode Island meal to make ½ oz. and 1 only
of yellow granular meal. The granular meal will need to be scalded with
a part of the water or it will feel sandy in the granella.

The weights for a larger quantity are:

8½ lbs. bread flour, 1 lb. oats, ½ lb. corn meal, 1½ oz. salt.

=Granella No. 2--rice, wheat and barley=

    ¼ cup rice
    2¼ cups bread flour
    ¾ cup barley grits
    salt
    water

Cook rice in one cup water, cool, add salt, flour and grits, knead to
very stiff dough, adding a trifle more water if necessary. Finish as
No. 1.

½ cup rice _flour_, 1½ cup bread flour and ¾ cup barley grits may be
used instead of the above combination.

=Granella No. 3--rye, wheat and barley=

    ½ cup rye meal
    2 cups bread flour
    1 cup barley grits
    salt

=Granella No. 4--rye, wheat and corn=

    ½ cup rye meal
    2 cups bread flour
    1-2 tablespns. corn meal
    salt
    water




MACARONI (ITALIAN PASTE)


Macaroni is one of the most important of cereal foods. The
best--Italian--is made from a wheat rich in gluten, so to a great
extent it supplies the place of meat.

One of the first things we do when we go into a new place is to hunt
up an Italian macaroni store, as that is the only place where the
genuine article is to be found. That made in this country, put up with
a foreign label on the package, is inferior.

The Italian pastes come in a great variety of shapes and are named
according to the shape. Macaroni, spaghetti and vermicelli are well
known; then there are lasagne (broad and flat), rigatoni (large
corrugated), da natali, ditali rigati, cannaroni rigati and reginnetti
with mostacioli bianchi, soprafini (fine vermicelli), ditalini and
acini di pepe--a few of the many. There are some small fine pastes put
up in dainty boxes, especially for invalids, that are very delicate and
digestible.

Those who have visited macaroni factories in Italy where macaroni
is made for exportation, say that everything in connection with the
food is neat and clean and that the macaroni is dried in closed rooms
entirely removed from the dust of the street. That which travellers see
drying by the roadside, exposed to the dust, is from small or private
factories for home consumption.


To Cook Macaroni

Do not wash or soak it. Break it when necessary and put into perfectly
boiling salted water, 8 parts water to 1 of macaroni. Stir as soon as
it is put into the water and often, until it begins to roll up, from
the rapid boiling. Keep over a hot fire where it will continue to
roll in boiling until well swollen and nearly done, then set back to
simmer slowly. When perfectly tender (which will be in from ½ to 1
hour according to the size, age and quality, the better quality taking
longer) turn into a colander and when drained, turn cold water over it,
or, let it stand in cold water until ready to use.

Vermicelli and the other small varieties for soup require only twice
their bulk of water, and some of them require 10 m. only for cooking.
They will usually just absorb the water.

When preferred, macaroni may be cooked in just the amount of liquid it
will absorb, which will be about 4 times its bulk. It may be cooked
sometimes in a rich consommé, sometimes in milk in a double boiler,
or in milk and water. It is often partly cooked in water, drained and
finished in milk.

The “traditional” way of cooking spaghetti is to put the ends into
water and coil it around in the kettle as it softens, cooking in full
lengths and eating it the same, but the propriety of this method is
questionable. In the first place, its sauce is apt to spatter in the
effort to introduce the coil into the mouth, and mastication is sure to
be incomplete.

The measurements of macaroni vary according to the size. For a large
open variety, a cup and a half will be required where it would take
only a cup of a small kind, or of the ordinary pipe-stem macaroni
broken into inch lengths.

There is nothing that gives such character to macaroni as to cook a
little garlic with it, a very little for some tastes, not more than ½ a
clove to each cupful, less even, if the macaroni is not to be drained
and the cloves are large. We seldom cook any preparation of macaroni
without it, and people wonder why our macaroni has such a good taste.
Not enough should be used to give a positive garlic flavor.

Pine nuts and sour cream give the cheese flavor. A good quality of
macaroni is good without any sauce, just cooked in salted water and
eaten slowly with nuts; but it may be served with any desired, tasty
sauce. The mushroom sauces, Italian or Boundary Castle are especially
delightful with it, but many others are excellent, olive and nut
butter, old-fashioned milk gravy, lentil gravy, a good cream sauce,
cream of tomato sauce, or any of the nice, meaty flavored sauces, or
parsley butter.

Sometimes return macaroni to the fire after draining, and add a little
butter, with or without chopped parsley, for those who use butter, or a
little milk and butter or a few spoonfuls of cream. Then another time,
put this cream or butter macaroni into a vegetable dish and pour a few
hot stewed tomatoes over it.

=Baked Macaroni in Cream Sauce=

    1-1½ cup macaroni, according to size
    2 small onions
    1-2 small cloves of garlic
    1 qt. water
    1½-2 teaspns. salt

  _Sauce_:--

    1½ tablespn. oil
    1½ tablespn. flour
    1 large pt. milk
    salt, crumbs
    chopped parsley

Make cream sauce in the usual way with the oil, flour, salt and milk
and pour into baking dish, turn into it the macaroni which has been
cooked in the salted water with sliced onion and garlic until tender
and the water absorbed, and press down into the sauce; sprinkle with
crumbs and parsley and bake in moderate oven until bubbling and
delicately browned. If preferred, ¼ cup of flour may be used in the
sauce.

Make enough of this dish for two days, and another day stir salted
tomato into what is left and bake as before for Macaroni in Tomato
Sauce.

=Macaroni--Pine Nuts=

Add ½ cup of pine nut butter or meal to the sauce in the preceding
recipe (by mixing a little of the sauce with it) and sprinkle with
chopped meats and crumbs.

=Macaroni--Corn=

    ¾-1 cup macaroni
    3 cups boiling water
    1-1½ teaspn. salt
    1 small onion
    ½-1 small clove of garlic if wished
    1 cup canned, or stewed fresh corn

  _Sauce_:--

    1 cup rich milk or thin cream
    ½ tablespn. flour
    ½ teaspn. salt

Add corn and cooked macaroni to sauce, turn all into baking dish,
sprinkle with crumbs and pour a little melted butter over if sauce is
made with milk. Brown in oven.

=Browned Macaroni and Granella=

1 cup macaroni, ¾-1 cup granella, 3 cups rich milk (more if necessary).
Dry and delicately brown macaroni in oven and cook the same as
unbrowned. Put into baking dish in layers with granella, turn milk,
slightly salted, over and heat in moderate oven. It should be quite
moist when done. Unless the milk is about one-fourth cream, there may
be a little oil or butter poured over the top.

=Macaroni--Tomato and Onion=

Simmer onion in oil or butter, add stewed tomatoes and salt; simmer a
few minutes and add cooked macaroni; set back where it will heat slowly
for a short time and serve.

Tomatoes, onions and macaroni may be put into baking dish in layers,
with a sprinkling of pine nut meal; with tomatoes, crumbs and chopped
nuts on top, and baked.

=Vermicelli--Asparagus=

Cook vermicelli in salted water, drain, spread on platter, lay stalks
of cooked asparagus on it and pour egg cream sauce over. Cut asparagus
into inch lengths if preferred.

=Macaroni in Milk=

Heat 1 qt. of milk in inner cup of double boiler, add 1 cup of macaroni
and cook until tender, perhaps for 2 hrs. Serve plain as side dish or
for luncheon or supper. It may also be served with stewed raisins, with
or without cream.

=★ Cream Mold of Macaroni=

Cook ½ cup of macaroni with or without a few slices of onion and a
suspicion of garlic, in 2 cups of water with ½ tablespn. of butter
until tender and well dried out; drain, add ⅔ cup milk, 1 large egg and
salt. Turn into well buttered mold and bake covered in pan of water in
moderate oven until egg is set, ¾-1 hour. Serve with Boundary Castle or
any suitable sauce.

=★ Macaroni--Sour Cream=

    2-3 cups macaroni
    1 pt. sour cream (or sour milk with butter or oil)
    1 teaspn. salt
    1 egg

Add beaten egg and salt to cream and pour over cooked macaroni in
baking dish; sprinkle with crumbs and bake until egg is set.

Rice may be used in place of macaroni, tomato also may be added
sometimes with chopped onion; a delicate flavoring of sage gives
another variety.




BREADS--LEAVENED


Yeast

Yeast is a plant and success in bread-making depends upon its growth.

Plants require warmth, food and moisture and thrive the best when not
too warm nor too cold.

A temperature of from 75 degrees to not over 90 degrees is the most
favorable for the growth of the yeast plant.

Compressed yeast is the most convenient to use when it can be obtained
fresh, but the bread made from it lacks the sweet rich flavor of that
made from a good soft yeast; so from the great number of good recipes
for liquid yeast I give two with which I have had excellent success.

Use only mature, well ripened potatoes for yeast. Hops may be omitted
but the yeast keeps better and the bread is lighter and sweeter when a
few are used.

Keep yeast in several small jars rather than in one large one, so as
not to disturb the whole when using from it.

Bread rises slowly from yeast that is less than 48 hours old. When
liquid yeast is used, let it count as part of the wetting. Compressed
yeast is meant when dry is not specified in recipes calling for cakes
of yeast.

To use compressed yeast, slice it in rather thin slices, sprinkle sugar
between the layers and pour just enough lukewarm water over it to
moisten the sugar, not enough to cover the yeast. Let stand until foamy
and use at once.

One cake of compressed yeast equals 4 tablespns. of either grated or
mashed potato yeast.

=Grated Potato Yeast=

    2 qts. water
    2 tablespns. hops
    6 medium sized or 3 very large potatoes
    ½ cup sugar
    ¼ cup salt
    1 cup soft yeast, or 2 cakes of good dry yeast
        (yeast foam when obtainable)

Dissolve yeast in warm water with part of the sugar. Simmer the hops
in water for half an hour, strain, add enough water to make 2 qts.
and keep at boiling point. Put sugar and salt into a large granite or
porcelain kettle, quickly grate the pared potatoes over them, set the
kettle over the fire and pour the boiling hop water on to the mixture,
stirring; let boil until thickened, remove from fire, cool to lukewarm,
add the yeast, beating it in well and let stand on table or shelf in
warm kitchen; as it rises, stir it down once in a while; when well
risen, set in a cool place and stir down occasionally until it does
not rise any more. Fill clean cold jars about ⅔ full and when settled,
fasten covers on and put in ice box.

Use 1 tablespn. of yeast to each pint of water when setting bread over
night, and double the quantity for starting in the morning.

=Mashed Potato Yeast=

    1¼ cup smooth mashed potato
    1 tablespn. loose hops
    1 tablespn. sugar
    1 teaspn. salt

¾ cup of water in which potatoes and hops were boiled, 1 cake of dry
yeast dissolved in ¼ cup of water with a little of the sugar, or, ½ cup
of hop water and ½ cup of liquid yeast.

Tie the hops in a piece of cheese cloth and cook with the well washed
but not pared potatoes (the yeast is lighter if the skins are left on);
when done, drain and peel potatoes and rub through colander on to the
salt and sugar; beat well, pour water on gradually, add yeast, beat,
put into a clean glass jar, lay the cover on without fastening down and
let stand in a warm room until full of bubbles, no longer; then set in
a cold place. When thoroughly cooled, fasten the cover tight and keep
in refrigerator.

Use ¼-½ cup of yeast to a pint of liquid, according to the time you
wish to give the bread to rise.

=Dry Yeast=

    1 cup loose hops
    2 qts. water
    1 qt. pared potatoes in small pieces
    flour
    1 cup corn meal

Boil potatoes with hops tied in cheese cloth until tender; remove hops
(squeezing bag when cool), put potatoes and water through colander,
and stir into the liquid while scalding hot, enough flour to make a
rather stiff batter. Beat well, add ½ cup of yeast or 2 dry yeast cakes
dissolved in water. When light, add the cup of corn meal or enough to
make a dough stiff enough to roll; roll ⅓-½ in. thick, cut into small
square or round cakes, dry in the sun or in a slightly warm oven (they
are sometimes dried between two boards covered with corn meal) until so
much of the moisture is expelled that they cannot ferment.

If kept dry the cakes will retain their strength for a long time. The
small pieces of dough may be crumbled and dried.


Flour

White, graham and whole wheat are the flours most commonly used in
making bread. White _bread_ flour is made from spring wheat, which is
richer in gluten than winter wheat and is of a rich cream color.

Winter wheat flour is more suitable for cakes and pastry, and for that
reason is called _pastry_ flour.

A blended flour, spring and winter wheat combined, is considered by
some the most nearly perfect bread flour.

Graham flour is composed of the whole kernel of the wheat, its bran
overcoat and all, ground up together. The bran contains no nutriment
and is irritating to some stomachs. Graham flour is nearly always made
from winter wheat.

In making whole wheat or entire wheat flour, the bran or fibrous
covering of the kernel is removed and the entire nourishing part of
the grain is ground. Whole wheat flour is usually made from spring
wheat.

Some so-called “whole wheat” flours are simply very fine graham; that
is, the bran is all there, but ground very fine.

The best grades of flour are the cheapest as a smaller quantity is
required for the same amount of liquid. Good flour also requires less
kneading.

Perhaps the greatest deception has been practised in “gluten” flours.
Some which have been advertised as pure gluten have been found to
contain as high as 63 and 75 per cent. of starch. A pure gluten flour
for making yeast bread is out of the question.

Flour made from new wheat will for a time improve with age, but after a
certain period it begins to deteriorate; so it is not best to lay in a
too large supply at once.

Keep flour in a warm, dry place, as all bread, cakes and pastry are
lighter made from dry flour.

“For use in bread-making the superfine white flour is not the best. Its
use is neither healthful nor economical. Fine flour bread is lacking in
nutritive elements to be found in bread made from the whole wheat. It
is a frequent cause of constipation and other unhealthful conditions.”


BREAD--YEAST


Suggestions

Bread should not be set over night when there is the least possibility
of its becoming light enough to fall before it can be attended to in
the morning.

Dough mixed stiff at first requires double the quantity of yeast of
that started with a sponge, but as this method has several advantages
it is becoming the favorite. Beat the batter very thoroughly for either
method, as that has much to do with the lightness of the bread.

Keep bread at all stages at as even a temperature as possible and away
from draughts of air. A large pasteboard box is an excellent thing to
set it into.

A moist atmosphere is most favorable for raising bread.

Keep bread covered close to prevent a crust from forming over the top.
Paper is better than cloth to exclude the air.

To hasten the rising of bread, use a larger quantity of yeast rather
than a higher temperature. Above 90 degrees the bacteria which were in
the flour or yeast may begin to grow and the bread will be sour. Given
more time and raised at a lower temperature, bread will be sweeter and
of a finer texture.

Attend to bread at every stage as soon as light, before it begins to
fall; exercise especial care in this respect with compressed yeast as
it loses its life very quickly after becoming light.

Bread will rise better in a deep vessel, such as a pail or a stone
crock, than in a broad flat pan. Always oil the dishes used for raising
it in.

Each time that bread rises it loses some of its sweetness and nutritive
value, so the fewer times it is allowed to rise the better, if light
enough to be digestible.

Some cooks prefer flour that has been delicately browned for setting
the sponge for bread.

A good bread kneader is one of the best investments in cooking
utensils. It saves time and strength and makes better bread.

“In the making of raised or yeast bread, milk should not be used in
place of water. The use of milk is an additional expense and it makes
the bread much less wholesome. Milk bread does not keep sweet so long
after baking as does that made with water and it ferments more readily
in the stomach.”

In cakes and crusts where milk is used with yeast, sour milk may be
substituted for sweet with the same results.

To aid fermentation, a little sugar may be used in starting bread, but
not enough to cover the sweet taste of the flour.

At a great altitude, bread rises very quickly; and requires less yeast.

Do not allow bread to get over light, even if it does not become sour;
for the sweet taste will be destroyed, and if in the loaf, it will fall
in the oven.

Whole wheat and graham bread will be lighter if ⅓ white flour is used;
and if white flour alone is used for the sponge the bread will not be
so apt to sour.

Whole wheat and graham bread need to be mixed stiffer than white and
must not be allowed to become very light or they will fall in the oven
and have a hollow place in the loaf.

Bread from whole wheat and graham flour requires slower and longer
baking.

Whole wheat, graham or rye bread may be steamed 3 hours and baked
slowly ½ hr., sometimes.

Salt delays fermentation, so when bread is started with a sponge the
salt should not be added until the sponge is light, and it may be
worked in at the end of the first rising of the mass of dough.

When a large quantity of bread is made at a time, a smaller proportion
of yeast is required. Stir soft yeast well before using from it. Do not
let the jar of yeast stand in a warm kitchen for a few minutes even.

It is impossible to give an exact rule for the proportion of flour to
liquid in bread as different brands of flour vary and the same brand
may be dryer or more moist at different times; but usually not less
than three times as much flour as of liquid is required, and not much
more.

Near the sea level bread dough may be mixed as soft as it can be well
handled; but as the altitude increases the stiffness of the dough
should increase.

Flour must be warm when added to bread at any stage.

Do not add any flour to bread after the last rising before putting it
into the tins, “as all the flour in it is, in a fermentative sense,
cooked and the addition of raw flour injures its quality.”--_Charles
Cristodoro._ Oil the board and your hands instead.

“Bread should be light and sweet, not the least taint of sourness
should be tolerated. The loaves should be small and so thoroughly baked
that so far as possible, the yeast germs shall be destroyed. When hot
or new, raised bread of any kind is difficult of digestion. _It should
never appear on the table._”

The loaves should be baked in separate tins, brick shaped ones being
best. If the loaf feels soft on the sides when removed from the tin,
return it to the oven for it is not done. When done, leave loaves where
the air can circulate around them until cool.

Keep bread in tin or stone receptacles, never in wood; wash them often
in warm soapsuds and scald thoroughly.

Never cover bread in the box with a cloth, if anything is required, use
paper. Cloth causes a musty taste and smell.

Do not allow crumbs or bits of bread to collect in the box or jar.

To freshen stale bread or buns, place them in a hot oven above a pan
of boiling water; or put into one tin and cover with another and leave
10-30 m. according to size of loaf and heat of oven.

Rolls are sometimes dipped in milk or water and heated in the oven; or,
put into a paper sack and left in the oven for 10 m.

=White Bread=

    2-4 tablespns. liquid yeast, or 1 cake compressed yeast
    warm water to make 1 qt. of liquid
    2 tablespns. oil
    1 teaspn. sugar
    1 teaspn. salt
    3-3½ qts. flour

Put yeast in a quart measure (compressed yeast will have been dissolved
according to directions) and fill the measure with warm water. Turn
into warm mixing bowl, add oil, sugar and salt (sugar may be omitted),
mingle, add flour until a drop batter is formed; beat vigorously for
5 m., then continue to add flour. When too stiff to stir, knead on
molding board until dough is smooth and does not stick to the board
by deft handling, place in a well oiled deep dish, cover well and let
stand in a moderately warm place until light. It may now be folded down
and turned over and allowed to come up half way again, or be put at
once into the tins.

Allow bread to rise in tins to a little more than double its bulk
(experience will do more for one in determining the proper degree of
lightness than any recipe), and put into a moderate oven with spaces
between the pans; when well risen and moderately browned, lower the
temperature of the oven a little and finish baking. Cover with asbestos
sheets or paper if bread is in danger of becoming too brown. ¾-1 hr.
will be required for baking a medium sized loaf.

=Fruit Bread=

Use double the quantity of oil and from ¼-½ cup of sugar in the recipe
for white bread, add 2 large cups of seedless raisins or 1 cup each of
raisins and currants. Dates or figs may be used when preferred.

=Nut Bread=

Use 2 cups coarse chopped nuts instead of fruit, in fruit bread recipe.
Brown sugar may be used instead of white, or sugar may be omitted
altogether.

=Irish Bread=

Brown sugar, raisins, currants and caraway seeds in fruit bread recipe.

=Whole Wheat and Graham Bread=

Use ⅓ white flour and ⅔ whole wheat or graham instead of all white
flour in the recipe for white bread. These breads require to be kneaded
a little stiffer than white flour bread to prevent their being coarse
grained and falling in the oven; also, care must be taken that they do
not get too light before baking. It is a mistake to put molasses or
sugar into graham bread as it conceals the sweet nutty flavor of the
flour.

=Zwieback Bread=

    1 pt. water
    ½ teaspn. salt
    4 tablespns. yeast or
    1 cake compressed yeast
    ⅓-½ cup corn meal
    white flour to knead

It is better not to use oil in zwieback bread.

=New York “Home Made” Bread=

2-4 tablespns. liquid yeast or 1 cake compressed yeast, warm water to
make 1 qt., white flour for drop batter; beat well. When light, add 1
cup corn meal gruel (to make, use 1 tablespn. of granular meal to each
cup of boiling water and cook 2 hrs.), 1¼ teaspn. salt, and flour for
smooth dough. Let rise in bulk once, then put into pans. A baker gave
me this idea. He said he had a great run on it once in New York City
under the name of “Home Made” bread. The bread is very moist and sweet.

=Oatmeal Bread. Mrs. Cobb, Bay City=

    ¾ cup oatmeal or 1 cup (pressed down) of rolled oats
    1 qt. water
    2 tablespns. oil
    ¼ cup sugar
    2-4 tablespns. yeast or 1 cake compressed yeast
    1 teaspn. salt
    white flour

Cook oats in water as for porridge, 1½-3 hrs., cool to lukewarm, add
sugar, oil, yeast, and flour for sponge; beat, let rise, add salt, and
flour for soft dough; when risen form into loaves and when moderately
light bake from ¾-1 hr. Sugar need not be used.

=★ Rye Bread=

    1 pt. water
    1 tablespn. oil
    ¾ teaspn. salt
    3 tablespns. liquid yeast
    3 cups rye meal, not flour
    4½-5 cups white flour or enough to make a very stiff dough

Let rise once in bulk and put into tins; when light, bake in moderate
oven. Add caraway seeds when liked.

=★ Rice Bread=

Cook 2 cups of rice in 2 qts. of water until tender; cool to lukewarm;
add 4-6 tablespns. yeast with water to make 1 pt., 1½ teaspn. salt and
4-5 cups white flour, or enough to make a very stiff dough.

=★ Crisp Bread=

  _Sponge_:--

    1 cup water
    1 tablespn. oil
    ⅓ cake yeast
    1½-1¾ cup bread flour

When light, add 1 cup fine dry bread crumbs, knead well, use crumbs to
roll the dough, roll ¼ in. thick, cut into large rings, let rise and
bake in moderate oven until crisp.

Crumbs may be kneaded into bread dough and finished the same.

=Potato Ball Bread=

    2 cups mashed potato
    1 cake dry yeast
    1 teaspn. salt
    2 teaspns. sugar

Add yeast cake powdered fine, to the potato when lukewarm, and the salt
and sugar when cold; form into a ball, cover and keep in cool place
2 or 3 days. When ready to bake, add 2 cups mashed potato mixed with
1 teaspn. salt and 2 of sugar to the ball. Make a ball of half the
mixture and add enough warm water to the remainder to make 2 qts. or
more. Add warm flour to knead, let rise in bulk once or twice before
putting into pans.

Proceed in the same manner for each baking, keeping the ball covered in
a cool place between bakings. A new ball will not need to be started
oftener than once in three months if at all.

This yeast works very quickly and makes beautiful bread. Of course for
small bakings, half the quantity of yeast would be sufficient.

=“Delicious” Bread=

I do not know the origin of this yeast but the bread is truly named.

Put into a pitcher or some suitable deep vessel 2 cups of mashed potato
to which has been added 1 cup of sugar and 1 qt. of warm water. Cover
and let stand in a warm room for from 1 to 3 days or until covered with
a foam almost like the meringue on a pie. Mix some of this foam with 1
cup of warm mashed potato, let stand in a warm place 1-2 hrs., add 1
tablespn. of salt and set away in a cool place.

To the original yeast add 1-2 qts. water, 2-3 teaspns. salt and warm
flour to knead; when light, stir down, and put into pans the second
time it rises. Be careful not to let it get over light in the pans
before baking.

For the next baking, add 1 cup of sugar and the 1 cup of potato
reserved from the last baking, to 2 cups of fresh mashed potato; take
out 1 cupful as before, let stand in warm place 1 hr., add 1 tablespn.
of salt and set in a cool place.

To the 2 cups of potato add a little water and set in a warm place
until light, when water to make 2 or 3 qts. may be added and the bread
kneaded up.

This bread needs to be eaten to be appreciated.

The yeast may be used in universal crust, raised cakes and wherever
other yeast is used, with delightful results.

=Boston Brown Bread. Corn and Rye=

    1 pt. warm water
    1 tablespn. oil
    1 teaspn. salt
    ¾ cup molasses
    ⅔-1 cake of yeast
    1 pt. rye meal
    1 pt. granular corn meal

Mix all ingredients, let rise; pour into tins, let rise, not too light;
steam 3 hrs. bake 20-30 m. in slow oven.

Raisins or nuts or both are good in brown bread.

=Boston Brown Bread, No. 2.=

    1 pt. water
    1 tablespn. oil
    ¾ cup molasses
    ⅔-1 cake yeast
    1 teaspn. salt
    1⅓ cup pastry flour
    1⅓ cup rye flour
    3-3⅓ cups granular corn meal

Mix all ingredients except corn meal, let rise, add meal, turn into
tins and when risen not quite double, steam for 3 hrs. and bake 20 m.
to ½ hr. in slow oven.

=West Virginia Scalded Corn Meal Bread=

    1 cup Rhode Island meal
    1 cup boiling water
    1½ cup warm water
    3-3½ cups dry meal
    ¾ cake of compressed yeast
    1 small egg
    1-1¼ teaspn. salt
    1 tablespn. oil

A little more meal may be used.

Scald 1 cup of meal with boiling water, add warm water, yeast, oil and
dry meal. When light, add salt and beaten egg, let rise in the dish in
which it is to be baked. The bread is best baked in an iron skillet or
frying pan with a cover.

=★ Corn Cake=

  _Sponge_--

    1 pt. skimmed milk
    1 tablespn. oil
    1 tablespn. sugar
    ½ cake yeast
    4¼-4½ cups pastry flour

When light; 1 teaspn. salt, 2 cups granular corn meal, 2 eggs slightly
beaten. Turn into well oiled pan to depth of 1-1½ in., let stand in
warm place a few minutes, bake in moderate oven.

The quantity of flour will vary with the brand, 3¾-4 cups only of
bread flour will be required. The eggs make a finer grained as well as
lighter bread. One egg will do if eggs are scarce.

=Salt Rising Bread--Suggestions=

Tastes and opinions differ concerning this bread but no other takes its
place to those who were accustomed to it in childhood.

With a little practice, salt rising bread becomes less work to make
than hop yeast bread. It is more wholesome and richer flavored and
keeps better than other yeast bread, and it has a fine cake-like
texture.

The experience of some persons is that salt rising bread is less apt to
cause acidity in the stomach than hop yeast bread.

The secrets of success with it are in keeping it evenly warm; in not
making it too stiff; and in not kneading it too much. Too much flour
renders salt rising bread dry and powdery.

The water surrounding the rising at different stages should be at a
temperature of 110 to 125 degrees, or so that it feels hot to the hand,
but not scalding.

In cold weather, an ideal way to keep the loaves warm while rising is
to put them on bricks in a pan or tub of warm water and cover them with
a blanket.

It is well to scald all utensils used for the bread with boiling
sal-soda water and to use the same water to stand the yeast in while
rising.

While the flour added to salt rising bread should be warm, it must
never have been hot at any time before using as it is the yeast germs
which it and the other ingredients contain that raise the bread.

The loaves should be wrapped in a thick cloth when taken from the oven
and left until cold. Salt rising bread makes sweet and tender zwieback.

=Salt Rising Bread. No. 1=

Mix 1 tablespn. each of salt, sugar and corn meal (white or Rhode
Island if obtainable) with 3 tablespns. of oil, pour over all 1½ pt. of
boiling water; stir until sugar and salt are dissolved, then add 1½ pt.
cold water that has never been heated. Add warm flour for thick batter
which will be rather thin after beating (about 2 qts., perhaps). Beat
thoroughly and set in pan of water at 110 to 125 degrees or in some
place that can be kept at a uniform temperature much warmer than for
common yeast bread but not warm enough to scald the rising. When the
first bubbles appear, beat the batter thoroughly and repeat the beating
each hour until light, which will be in from 4-6 hours. The rising
should not be allowed to become too light at any time. When the batter
is light, close the doors so that there will be no draughts. Have the
pans oiled and warm, and the flour warm. Add the flour rapidly with
very little stirring, to the batter; when stiff enough, turn all out on
to a warmed, floured board and work in quickly with as little kneading
as possible enough flour for a rather soft dough; form into loaves and
place in oiled pans, set in a warm place, covering well to keep a crust
from forming over the top as well as to keep the loaves warm. As soon
as light, place in a moderate oven and bake thoroughly.

=Salt Rising Bread. No. 2=

To 1 cup very warm water add ½ teaspn. of salt and fine middlings
(shorts) to make a rather stiff batter; beat well, cover and set in a
dish of very warm water, covered, beat 2 or 3 times while rising. When
light, turn into a warm mixing bowl, add 1 pt. or more of warm water, a
little more salt and warm graham flour (part white flour if preferred)
for a soft dough, and finish the same as No. 1.

=★ Universal Crust=

For shortcakes, fruit tarts, meat and vegetable pies, pot pie
dumplings, crackers, buns, steamed puddings, loaf cake, doughnuts and
cookies, rusk and Sally Lunn.

    1 cup skimmed milk
    ⅓ cup (large 4 tablespns.) oil
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    ½ teaspn. sugar
    1-2 tablespns. liquid yeast or ⅓ cake compressed yeast
    pastry flour

Mix all ingredients except salt and add flour for sponge batter; beat;
when light, add salt and warm flour for moderately stiff dough. Knead
a little and cut into biscuit for the top of fruit tarts or meat or
vegetable pies, or place on tins for shortcake crusts. For dumplings,
use only ¼ cup of oil or 1½ tablespn. of raw nut butter.

The crust may be kneaded stiff at first and allowed to rise twice.

If the crusts are not fine grained it is because you have not used
enough flour or have not kneaded them enough; but they do not want to
be quite as stiff as bread is usually mixed.

Shortcake crusts or tins of thin biscuit may be made and kept on hand
and just warmed up when needed, or laid over meat or vegetable pie
fillings or hot cooked fruit fillings and left in the oven long enough
to warm through.

We consider this one of the most valuable recipes in the book since it
can be used in so many ways in the place of baking powder crusts.

=Sour Cream Crust--no soda=

    1 cup thick sour cream
    ⅓-½ cake compressed yeast
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    white flour

Make sponge or knead at once to soft dough, let rise, make into any
desired shape and when light, bake. This is very nice for shortcake
crusts and can be used for nearly all purposes that universal crust is.
That the cream was sour would not be known after the crust is baked.

=Sally Lunn. Breakfast or Supper Bread=

Use 1 egg, with or without 1 tablespn. of sugar to each cup of milk in
universal crust. Bake in shallow or thick loaf as preferred.

=★ ★ Soup Crackers=

    1 cup of skimmed milk or water
    ⅓ cup (scant half cup with water) of oil or oil and melted butter
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ½ teaspn. sugar
    1 or 2 tablespns. liquid yeast or ¼-½ cake compressed yeast
    pastry flour for stiff dough, 4½-5 cups

Knead thoroughly (dough may be put through food cutter 5 or 6 times);
when light, fold down and turn over and when risen again, roll thin,
prick all over quickly with fork or docker, cut into any size or shape
desired and bake at once before the crackers have time to rise and
acquire a bread like taste. Bake in a moderate oven until well dried
all through, but not too brown. When properly baked these crackers are
more suitable for soups than unleavened crackers, as they are more
porous and tender. Tiny ones cut with a plain round pastry tube are
attractive for special occasions. They may be cut in larger sizes,
sometimes as large as a saucer, like the Swedish milk biscuit, for
serving salads or entrées upon. For salads, they may have a hole in the
center. I have an oblong cutter, made by bending a small round tin tube
into that shape, that makes pretty soup crackers. Bake the dough in
long slender rolls for Soup Sticks.

=★ Rolls=

  _Dough_--

    1 pt. milk
    ½-1 cake compressed yeast or 2-4 tablespns. liquid yeast
    ½-¾ teaspn. salt
    2 tablespns. oil
    about 3 pts. flour

Add yeast to warm milk with flour for batter; let rise, add salt, oil,
and flour to knead. Knead and pound dough until elastic. Let rise in
bulk or roll out at once. 1 tablespn. of sugar is sometimes added to
light sponge; also 1 egg or 2 yolks or 2 beaten whites.

An excellent way is to let the dough rise in bulk after kneading, and
when light, turn from the oiled bowl on to the board and roll out
without mixing.

For _Parker House_ rolls, roll dough ½ in. thick, cut out with large
biscuit cutter, press across the center or a little one side of the
center with a small round stick (the bakers have a piece of broom
handle rubbed smooth with sandpaper) or knife handle, brush one side
with oil or butter and fold the other side over, place on oiled and
floured pan with spaces between so the shape will not be spoiled in
baking. Let rise until very light, when nearly light, wring a cloth out
of warm water, not too dry, and lay it over the rolls for a short time.
Bake in quick oven.

For _Crescents_, roll the dough as nearly square as possible, less than
¼ in. thick, cut into strips 7 in. wide, cut the strips into squares
and the squares diagonally into halves; brush lightly with water, then
commence to roll firmly from the long side, opposite the point of the
triangle; leave the point underneath. Lay on the pans in the shape of
a horseshoe, when light, bake in a quick oven. May brush with white of
egg or thin cooked starch paste when nearly done.

The _Vienna_ roll is made by shaping the same as the Vienna loaf (a
little smaller at each end), about 6 in. in length. When the rolls are
light in the pan, gash the top of each diagonally three times with a
sharp knife. Bake in a moderate oven.

Roll dough into a long strip, cut into 3-in. lengths, lay close
together in pan, brush with syrup made by cooking together for one
minute equal quantities of milk and sugar; let rise, bake, for _Finger_
rolls.

Sometimes roll dough thick and cut with small round cutter.

For _Shamrock_ rolls, put three small round balls of dough in each gem
or muffin cup.

_Cleft_ rolls. Make dough into balls; when light, cut each roll across
the top with a sharp knife, about 1 in. deep, or, once each side of the
center, or, once each way, making a cross roll.

=Buttermilk Rolls=

    1 pt. buttermilk
    ½-¾ cup oil
    4 tablespns. yeast with warm water to make ½ cup
    1 tablespn. sugar
    1 teaspn. salt
    white flour

Warm buttermilk, add yeast and sugar with flour for sponge; when light,
add salt, and flour for soft dough, let rise and shape into rolls.

=Swiss Rolls. Bennett’s=

    1½ cup skimmed milk
    1 tablespn. sugar
    1½ tablespn. butter
    1 cake compressed yeast
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 egg, white flour

Boil milk, sugar and butter together, cool, add yeast, sprinkle in
flour gradually, agitating and beating liquid with batter whip; beat in
the egg and flour, beating with strong spoon, for a very stiff batter,
so stiff that it beats hard (may knead to soft dough). Leave in warm
kitchen 1 hr. or longer, set in icebox for several hrs. or 2 days;
roll, handling lightly, ¾ in. thick, spread with soft butter, roll up,
cut off 1½ in. thick, let rise, bake in moderate oven. The dough may be
baked in loaves and used for dainty sandwiches.

=★ Crumb Rolls=

  _Sponge_--

    1 pt. skimmed milk
    ⅓ cup oil
    ⅔ cake yeast
    4 cups bread flour

_When light_--2 cups dry bread crumbs (not very fine), a little salt if
crumbs are not very salt, flour to knead rather soft. Shape, and bake
when light.

One chef made himself famous by making rolls of crumbs.

=★ Crumb Rolls of Brown Bread=

  _Sponge_--

    1 pt. water
    2 tablespns. oil
    ⅔ cake of yeast
    3 cups bread flour

  _When light_--

    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 qt. fine, stale, brown bread crumbs
    2 cups flour, or enough to knead

Let rise in bulk, shape as desired, bake when light.

=Rolled Rolls=

Roll dough for rolls (p. 438) in a square ¼-½ in. thick, brush with
butter or not, sprinkle with maple sugar or chopped hickory nuts or
granulated sugar and ground coriander or anise seed, with or without
currants or raisins, or with a mixture of chopped citron, English
walnuts and sugar (maple or granulated), or chopped nuts, figs, raisins
and cocoanut. Roll tight, cut from the end in 1 or 1½ in. lengths,
lay close together in pan, let rise, and bake in moderate oven. Or,
roll bread dough out and spread with hard sauce flavored with vanilla,
lemon, coriander or anise. Sprinkle with currants or raisins. Roll,
bake, glaze with sugar and hot water.

=★ Potato Biscuit=

    1 cake yeast
    1 qt. water
    1 cup sugar
    2 cups mashed potato
    1 scant cup oil (or oil and melted butter mixed)
    4 or 5 eggs
    salt
    white flour

Add beaten eggs, warm water and all other ingredients to warm mashed
potato, with flour for stiff dough; when light, roll out, cut into
biscuit, let rise, bake.

=Split Biscuit=

Use only 2 tablespns. of sugar in potato biscuit with milk for wetting.

Roll light dough ½ in. thick, cut into biscuit, butter half of them on
top and lay one of the other half on top of each; lay close together in
pan, brush with butter, let rise, bake.

=★ Raised Biscuit=

Take roll dough or add a little more oil to bread dough, cut into small
biscuit and place a little way apart in pan, prick with fork, let rise
and bake. Or, cut strips of dough into small pieces, roll into balls
and place close together in tin. When there is a little piece of dough
left, break it into small, irregular pieces and put one on the top of
each biscuit.

=Breakfast Biscuit--rice, corn and flour=

Take cold boiled rice, double its quantity of flour, a little fine corn
meal, and yeast. Mix with water to dough and let rise over night. Roll
and cut into biscuit in the morning, let rise and bake for breakfast.

=★ Rusk=

    1 pt. milk
    ⅔ cup oil
    ½-1 cup sugar
    2 eggs
    1 cake yeast
    white flour
    coriander or anise

Beat oil and sugar together, stir in a little flour, add beaten eggs
and warm milk, then dissolved yeast and flour for sponge. When light,
add flour for smooth dough, let rise, mold into small biscuit, place
close together in biscuit tin or put into muffin rings, or roll 1 in.
thick, cut with biscuit cutter and place on pans a little distance
apart; when light, brush with equal quantities of sugar and cream (or
milk) boiled together 1 minute, dust with ground coriander or anise,
bake, and sprinkle with granulated sugar or chopped almonds as they are
taken from the oven. The brushing and dusting may be done after baking
if preferred.

=Browned Rusk=

Bake rusk dough in loaf cake pans in a moderate oven and the next day
cut into slices and dry and brown delicately the same as zwieback. Only
½ cup each of sugar and oil may be used or the sugar may be omitted
entirely. Thin biscuit of the dough baked separately without brushing
may be toasted the same as slices.

=Buns--plain=

    1 pt. milk
    ⅔-1 cake yeast
    ⅓-½ cup oil or melted butter
    2 tablespns. to ⅔ cup of
    sugar
    ½-1 teaspn. salt
    white flour

Add sugar, oil, salt and yeast to warm milk, with flour for soft dough;
knead, let rise, turn down and when half risen turn on to board without
stirring, roll out and cut with biscuit cutter, place on pans with
spaces between, let rise, bake. When buns are done, the tops may be
wet with molasses and milk, sugar and milk, or spread with beaten white
of egg, dusted with sugar and set in the oven to dry.

_Nut Buns_--Add 1 cup coarse chopped nuts to dough after first rising.

_Currant Buns_--1 cup of currants in place of nuts in above, with or
without 3 or 4 teaspns. ground coriander seed or ½ teaspn. ground anise
seed.

Raisins cut in quarters may be substituted for currants, with any
desired flavor, and nuts and raisins may be used for Fruit and Nut
Buns, and dried blueberries for Blueberry Buns.

=Beadles=

Mix universal crust stiff at first; after rising twice, roll ⅓-½ in.
thick, cut out with large round cutter, wash with mixture of beaten
yolks, milk and sugar flavored with lemon (grated rind may be used) and
dust the center with sugar, then draw over three sides of each toward
the center to form a triangle, but far enough apart to leave an opening
in the center to show the washed part. Brush with milk. When light bake
in quick oven. Four sides may be drawn over, making a square instead
of a triangle. When baked, a little jelly may be dropped in the center
for Jelly Beadles; cream puff filling for Cream Beadles, or thick prune
marmalade for Prune Beadles.

=Sr. Purdon’s Lemon Buns=

  _Sponge_--

    1¼ cup milk
    2½ tablespns. sugar
    1 cake yeast
    2 cups flour

  _When light_--

    ½ teaspn. salt
    ⅓ cup oil or butter
    3 tablespns. sugar
    ½ cup seeded raisins in quarters
    ½ teaspn. lemon extract, or grated rind of lemon
    flour for soft dough

Let rise, shape as desired, when light brush with milk, bake.

=Bread Sticks=

Work the white of one egg into a pint of light bread dough, mold into
slender sticks, place in stick pans, let rise, brush with milk or white
of egg and water; bake in hot oven.

Or, roll shortened dough to the size of a pencil and 6-8 in. long. Lay
on tins, let rise a little, bake in moderate oven.

Serve with soups or warm drinks.

=Crumb Cakes=

    1 cup milk or water
    1 tablespn. oil
    ⅔ cup flour
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    ⅓ cake compressed yeast
    1 egg
    about ⅔ cup coarse zwieback crumbs

Mix sugar and salt with dry flour, pour warm milk over gradually,
stirring; when smooth add yeast, and zwieback crumbs for not too stiff
batter, then the egg, white and yolk beaten separately; when light,
bake on griddle.

=Old-time Buckwheat Cakes--corn meal and flour=

Stir ½ cup of yellow corn meal into 1 qt. of boiling water; cook,
stirring, until thickened; when lukewarm add:

    1 teaspn. salt
    2-4 tablespns. soft yeast
    ½ cup white flour
    3 cups buckwheat flour

Beat, set in cool place until morning; add a little warm water if too
thick and use less flour next time.

=★ Buckwheat Cakes--bread crumbs=

    2 cups buckwheat flour
    2½ cups warm water
    ½ cake compressed yeast
    1 teaspn. salt
    1 cup stale bread crumbs
    (white or graham)
    1 cup milk

Add yeast to warm water and pour gradually over flour and salt,
stirring; when light add crumbs soaked in milk and warmed a little.




[Illustration: UNLEAVENED BREADS

    GEMS
    BEATEN BISCUIT
    STICKS
    CRACKERS
    ROLLS
    GEM IRONS]




BREADS--UNLEAVENED--WITHOUT CHEMICALS


“The use of soda and baking powder in bread making is harmful and
unnecessary. Soda causes inflammation of the stomach and often poisons
the entire system.”

The chemical substances left in foods by the union of soda and cream of
tartar in baking powders cannot be used by the system, so the excretory
organs are overworked in their efforts to throw them off.

Experiments have also proven that the chemicals of baking powder retard
digestion.

The use of yeast is preferable to baking powder or soda, but breads
made without baking powder, soda or yeast are best of all.

Unfermented breads are generally baked in small loaves, so that they
are dry and require thorough mastication.

Because of their dryness, dough breads are more desirable than batter
breads.

With the other advantages, unleavened breads have all the sweet taste
of the flour.

The substitute for carbonic acid gas is as pure and “as free as the
air we breathe,” for it is the air we breathe, the very same thing;
consequently it is inexpensive and the use of it requires less time and
labor than the making of fermented breads.

The _Essentials of Success_ in making unleavened breads are, after good
materials (the flour must be of the best); (_a_) that the ingredients
be as nearly ice cold as possible; (_b_) that the breads stand or rest
before baking, in a cold place for from 20 m. to 3 or 4 hrs., or over
night; (_c_) that the oven is not too hot when they are first put
in--not that they must be beaten very vigorously.

Iron is the best material for batter bread pans as it gives a firm,
steady heat. The irons with thin, flat, oval (not square cornered) cups
are best, but the small round cups are not objectionable and the stick
shaped pans are excellent. Next to irons are earthen custard cups.

When meal is to be scalded, heat it in the oven before pouring liquid
over it.

=Gems=

Batter breads baked in irons.

Have materials and utensils cold, put liquid with salt, oil and yolks
of eggs when used, in stone milk crock or deep pan, agitate for a
moment by moving wire batter whip briskly back and forth, when the
liquid will be full of bubbles. Sprinkle flour in, not too slowly,
with the left hand, keeping up the agitating motion. When the batter
is quite stiff, beat it (never stir it as that drives out the air)
just enough to incorporate all the flour. Give a few turns of the egg
beater to the whites of eggs (which are in a bowl with a little salt),
so that they are full of large bubbles, rinse off the beater with cold
water, give it a shake and hang it in its place. Turn the eggs on to
the batter and mix them in lightly, beating a little if necessary to
mix well; cover the dish and set it in the ice box (or in a pan of cold
water with a wet cloth over it) in summer, or in a cold room where
it will not freeze in winter, for not less than 20 m. and longer if
possible. (I always stir my gems up over night when making them for
breakfast.)

Slightly warm the pans and oil them.

When ready to bake the gems, warm the irons a little and without
stirring the batter dip it into the cups, filling them to the brim, set
into a slow oven that bakes well from the bottom.

Bake until well risen, increase the heat sufficiently to brown the gems
nicely, then lower the temperature and finish baking. Be sure that the
gems are well baked to the center. Turn out of pans at once and let
stand for 10 or 15 m. before serving. There is no objection to serving
unleavened breads warm.

If the oven does not bake well at the bottom, leave the pans on top of
the stove where it is not too hot, for 10-15 m., then place carefully
in the oven.

When baking with gas, put the gems on the top grate of the oven before
it is lighted; use one burner only at first and have that turned rather
low.

=Whole Wheat and Graham Gems=

    1⅓-1½ cup of milk,
    1 egg and flour for drop batter.

Graham gems should not be quite as stiff as whole wheat. Use the
quantity of milk that will just fill the pan; skimmed milk with 1½-2
tablespns. of oil to the quart equals whole milk. Brazil or other nut
butter or meal, with water, is sometimes used.

All whole wheat or graham flour may be used, but combining either with
⅓-⅔ white flour makes gems more digestible.

The batter may be made thinner than a drop batter, but I have better
gems when it is quite stiff. I take only 3 eggs to a quart of milk, but
more may be used. When we are so happy as to get a spring wheat graham
flour, 2 eggs to the quart of liquid is sufficient.

Gems may be made without eggs with all whole wheat, or graham flour of
spring wheat. They require a little more beating, the longer rest is
imperative, and the oven should be a little warmer at first.

Cold boiled rice may be added to thin gem batter sometimes, also grated
cocoanut.

=White, and Sally Lunn Gems=

Make the same as whole wheat gems, using white bread flour, and 1 egg
to each cup of milk, add 2 tablespns. of sugar for Sally Lunns.

=Fruit and Nut Gems=

Add a few English currants, seeded raisins in quarters, with or without
fine cut dates, or dried or fresh blueberries to any gem batter. Use
chopped nuts alone or with fruit. Ground citron goes nicely with nuts.

=Rye Gems=

    1 pt. skimmed milk
    1 tablespn. oil
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 egg
    3 cups rye meal or 3½-4 cups rye flour
    with or without a few caraway seeds

No oil is required with whole milk.

Plain rye or corn gems may be served with maple syrup.

=Rye and Wheat Gems=

    1 cup skimmed milk
    1 tablespn. oil
    1 egg
    salt
    ½-⅞ cup rye meal
    ⅞ cup white bread flour

=★ Crumb Gems=

    1 qt. skimmed milk
    2 tablespns. oil
    salt
    3 small eggs or 2 large ones
    graham flour for thin batter
    1 cup fine zwieback crumbs

Or, 1½ cup crumbs, ½ cup white flour, 2 eggs, 1 teaspn. sugar, with the
milk, salt and oil.

=★ Corn Meal and White Flour Gems=

    ½ cup granular corn meal
    ¾ cup boiling water
    ½ cup cold water
    ½ teaspn. salt
    2 teaspns. oil
    1 egg
    1¼ cup white bread flour

Scald meal with boiling water, add oil, salt, cold water and yolk of
egg; beat, add white flour, beating, and lastly stiffly-beaten white of
egg; rest. Bake in moderate oven.

=Corn and Graham Gems--no eggs=

    3 cups milk
    2 teaspns. oil
    3⅓ cups white corn meal
    1⅔ cup graham flour
    salt

=★ Cream Corn Gems or Griddle Cakes=

Stir enough corn meal into not too thick cream to make a stiff batter;
about 1½ cup meal to 1 of cream; add salt, beat a little, rest, bake in
gem irons or on griddle.

=Pop Overs=

    1 egg
    1 cup milk
    1 cup flour
    salt

Beat egg with salt; add half the milk, beat in the flour and add the
remainder of the milk, and without beating strain into a pitcher; rest.
Pour into rather hot irons and bake in moderate oven.

Sometimes the mixed egg and milk are poured gradually into the flour,
stirring, and sometimes the beaten white of egg only is used, being
added after straining batter. And again, a teaspoonful of oil or melted
butter is put in after the flour is beaten into half the milk.

German puffs call for 4 eggs and Vanity puffs for 6 eggs, with the
other ingredients the same.

=Other Variations of Pop Overs=

(_a_) 2 eggs, 1 cup milk, 1 cup flour, 2 teaspns. oil or melted butter.

(_b_) 2 eggs, 1 cup milk, 2 cups flour.

(_c_) 2 eggs, 2 cups milk, 1½ cup flour.

(_d_) 2 eggs, 1½ cup milk, 1½ cup flour.

=Whole Wheat Pop Overs=

    ⅔ cup whole wheat flour
    ⅓ cup white flour
    ⅞ cup milk
    salt
    1 egg

Mix flours and salt, stir into milk, add beaten egg, rest. Put into
rather hot oiled gem pans, bake.

=★ Corn Pop Overs=

    ⅔ cup corn meal
    ⅓ cup white flour
    ⅞ cup milk
    salt
    1 egg white and yolk beaten separate

=★ Sweet Potato Bread=

    3 large (or 1¼-1½ lb.) sweet potatoes
    1 teaspn. salt
    1½ level tablespn. butter or oil
    1½ cup granular corn meal
    ⅞ cup milk
    1 egg

Bake potatoes, peel and rub through colander, add salt, oil, meal, milk
and beaten egg; beat well. Bake in moderate oven 30-40 m. Serve hot.

=★ Rice Breakfast or Supper Cake=

    2 cups boiled rice
    1 tablespn. oil
    1 tablespn. melted butter
    1 cup milk
    salt
    3-6 eggs
    1 cup flour

Add stiffly-beaten whites of eggs last, rest, bake in shallow pans or
patty pans. Serve hot. The flour is sometimes omitted.

Take 1 cup each of rice and hominy for Rice and Hominy cake.

=★ Corn Bread=

    2 cups yellow granular meal
    2¼ cups boiling water
    1 teaspn. salt
    1¼ tablespn. oil
    1 egg

Pour boiling water over meal, add salt, oil and yolk of egg; cool, add
beaten white and bake in oiled pan. Use a little less water for Rhode
Island meal.

=Crumbs and Corn Bread=

    1 pt. hot milk
    ½ cup stale bread crumbs
    2 cups white corn meal
    2 eggs
    1½ tablespn. oil or melted butter
    1 teaspn. salt

Pour boiling milk over corn meal, stir well, add oil, salt and crumbs;
cool, add beaten yolks of eggs, then stiffly-beaten whites. Bake in
oiled pie pans. Or, soak meal and crumbs in cold milk for several hours
and add salt, oil and eggs as before.

=★ The Laurel Brown Bread. Sr. Olive Jones Tracy=

    1 qt. each of corn meal, rye meal and cold water
    1½ cup molasses
    2 teaspns. salt
    2 tablespns. oil
    6 eggs

Mix water, salt, molasses, oil and yolks of eggs and add mixed meals;
then stiffly-beaten whites of eggs. Steam 3 hrs., bake in slow oven ½
hr. 1 qt. of thin cream may be used in place of oil and water.

Halved, seeded raisins may be added occasionally or fine cut steamed
prunes or broken pieces of nuts.

=Crumb Brown Bread--no eggs or yeast=

    1 cup granular corn meal or 1½ of Rhode Island meal
    ½ cup rye meal
    ¾ cup molasses
    1 teaspn. salt
    2 cups water
    2½ cups (not too fine) dry bread crumbs

Mix and steam 3 hrs.

2 cups of granella in place of the crumbs is better still.

½ cup sugar with ½ cup more of water may be used in place of the
molasses. Cereal coffee may be used for the liquid, or a little browned
flour may be mixed with the meal.

=★ Johnny Cake=

    2½ cups granular corn meal
    3 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    salt
    about 1½ cup milk

Mix; rest 1 hr. or longer in cold place, bake in iron skillet in quick
oven.

=Southern Johnny Cakes=

½ cup each fine hominy, rice and rice flour, salt, water, milk. Cook
rice and hominy in 2 cups of water, each. Add ½-1 cup milk, salt and
rice flour; drop by spoonfuls on hot, oiled griddle, flatten with
fingers dipped in cold water, bake in oven or on top of stove.

=★ Bannock=

    ⅔ cup granular meal
    3½ cups boiling water
    ¾ teaspn. salt
    1 tablespn. oil or butter
    2 eggs

Cook meal in water for 10 m., add oil, cool a little, add yolks of
eggs, beat well, fold in stiffly-beaten whites of eggs, bake in oiled
pudding dish or pie plates, in moderate oven. Serve at once.

=Water Corn Bread=

1½ cup granular corn meal, salt, 1 cup cold water. Rest 1-2 hrs.,
spread thin on hot griddle or frying pan, bake in hot oven, serve hot.

=No. 2=

1 cup granular meal, salt, ¾ cup boiling water. Spread at once, thin,
on hot griddle or frying pan and bake in hot oven. Serve hot.

=Oat Cake=

1 cup fine oatmeal, ½ teaspn. salt, boiling water, 1-1½ cup perhaps.
Grind rolled oats (not too fine) if very fine meal is not obtainable.
Pour over enough boiling water to moisten, spread very thin on hot
oiled frying pan or griddle (or spread spoonfuls in cakes), bake on top
of stove or in hot oven.

=Corn Meal Crusts=

    1 cup yellow meal
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1½ tablespn. oil or melted butter
    1 teaspn. sugar
    1½ cup boiling water

Pour boiling water over meal, sugar and salt; beat well; add butter,
spread very thin on well oiled pans, bake. Pull apart while hot.

=White Corn Meal Crusts=

1 cup white corn meal, 2 cups boiling milk, 1 teaspn. salt; stir smooth
and pour ⅓-½ in. deep in oiled pan. Bake in moderate oven. Split for
eating.

=Rhode Island Johnny (Journey) Cakes=

Those who have not made the acquaintance of Rhode Island Johnny cakes
have missed much. To make them in their perfection Rhode Island meal
is required, though white meal will do. Do not try them with yellow
granular meal. Rhode Island meal has a creamy tint and is lighter in
texture than granular meal.

Mix the meal with salt in a cake bowl and pour perfectly boiling water
over it to more than moisten. (A rule for the quantity is out of the
question). Stir, and if necessary add more water. The batter should
be soft, but the meal must be well wet with the boiling water. Beat
and drop in spoonfuls on to a hot, well oiled griddle. Dip the hand
in water and flatten the cakes to about ¾ in. thick. Keep the griddle
hot until cakes are nicely browned on one side, turn, adding more oil
if necessary and brown on the other side; after which set back where
cakes will bake slowly for 20 m. to ½ hr. Serve with cream, nut cream
or butter, or with some meaty flavored gravy; sometimes honey or maple
syrup.

In many families these cakes form the bread for three times a day six
days in the week, and one soon comes to feel lost without them.

_As Toast_--Split cold cakes, lay in deep dish with salt and bits of
butter and pour hot milk over.

=Pone, or Corn Bread “Straight”=

1 qt. white corn meal, 1 teaspn. salt, cold water for soft dough. With
hands moistened with cold water mold into oblong mounds, a little
thicker in the center than at the ends. Lay on hot oiled or floured
pan, press a little with the fingers and bake in hot oven. Break (not
cut). Eat hot.

A little oil may be added to the meal for pone, but then it will not be
“straight.”

=Ash Cake=

Brush a place clean before the fire and lay the pones upon it. Let the
tops dry a little and cover with hot ashes. Bake until dry and firm,
15-30 m. Draw from the fire, brush off the ashes, wash and wipe, serve.
Buttermilk is the ideal accompaniment to ash cake or pone.

A cabbage leaf may be laid above and below the cake in the ashes; then
it will not require washing, but will need to be baked a little longer.

=Hoe Cake=

One hoe cake is the pone mixture baked on a hoe or griddle in one large
cake or in several small ones ¼-¾ in. thick.

Another--1 cup white Southern corn meal or Rhode Island meal, mix with
½ teaspn. salt and pour boiling milk or water over to make a batter
thick enough not to spread. Drop by spoonfuls on well oiled griddle
and press ½ in. thick. When nicely browned on one side, put a small
piece of butter or a little oil on top of each cake and turn. Bake
thoroughly. Serve hot. A teaspn. of sugar is sometimes added to the
meal, but “no Southern cook would risk the spoiling of her corn breads
by sweetening them.”

For campers, the batter may be spread on a floured oak board, the board
slanted in front of the fire and the hoe cake baked “in its original
way and with its original flavor;” or it may be baked on a smooth flat
stone which has been heated and floured. Sometimes the scalded meal is
allowed to stand for an hour or longer, then formed into cakes ½-¾ in.
thick before baking.

=★ Sr. Welch’s Corn Dodgers=

    ⅔ cup common yellow corn meal
    good ⅓ cup white flour
    1-2 teaspns. sugar
    salt
    1⅓ cup milk or water or half of each
    1 large egg
    1 teaspn. oil or melted butter

Mix corn meal and flour and heat in oven, add sugar and salt and pour
boiling liquid over, stir rapidly until smooth, add oil and yolk of
egg, then stiffly-beaten white; drop in spoonfuls on hot oiled pan;
bake in quite hot oven.

=Sr. Welch’s Corn Dodgers--granular meal=

    1 cup yellow granular corn meal
    large ½ cup white flour
    ½ tablespn. sugar
    salt
    2¾-3 cups boiling milk or water, or half of each
    1 large or 2 small eggs

Mix and bake as with common meal. If the liquid is not rich milk, use 1
tablespn. oil or melted butter.

Use ¾-1 cup of nut meal or butter and all water for Nut Corn Dodgers.

=Corn Meal Porridge Dodgers=

    1 cup corn meal
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 cup boiling water
    1 tablespn. oil or melted butter

Pour boiling water over corn meal and salt in inner cup of double
boiler; stir smooth, cook 1 hr., add oil, drop by spoonfuls on oiled
griddle, dip fingers in cold water and pat down flat; when browned put
a dot of butter or a little oil on top of each and turn. Serve with
poached eggs if desired.

=Griddle Cakes=

Batter for griddle cakes should stand 2 hrs. or longer in the ice box,
or in winter in some cold place, to lighten it by allowing the starch
grains and glutenous portion of the flour to swell.

An iron or steel griddle is best for baking cakes. Soapstone, so highly
recommended, is objectionable because little particles of the stone
adhere to the cakes.

The griddle should stand on a not too hot part of the stove and heat
slowly for a long time before the cakes are to be baked. Professional
pancake bakers have their griddle over a slow fire all night.

When oil is used in the batter, less or none is required on the griddle.

Have the griddle hot before putting the cakes on, brown them
delicately, then turn once only. A second turning makes them heavy.
Cakes ought to be eaten as soon as baked, but should not be covered
when required to stand for a short time.

=Plain Griddle Cakes=

    1 cup milk
    2 tablespns. oil
    2 eggs
    1¼-1½ cup bread flour
    ¼-⅓ teaspn. salt

Rest 2 hrs. or longer. May spread with jelly, or with butter and sugar
and roll.

=Rice Griddle Cakes=

Add 1-2 cups cold boiled rice to plain cakes.

=Crumb Griddle Cakes=

Use only 1 cup of flour in plain cakes and add stale or dry bread
crumbs to make quite a thick batter.

=Buckwheat Cakes=

Use ⅔ buckwheat in place of all white flour in plain cakes.

=Savory Meat Griddle Cakes=

Add crumbled trumese, fine chopped onion and powdered sage to rice or
crumb cakes.

=Mushroom Griddle Cakes=

Lay a spoonful or two of chopped mushroom stems, simmered in oil with
or without a little tomato, browned flour and onion, on each small thin
cake, roll lightly and serve with or without Italian or Boundary Castle
sauce.

=Plain Griddle Cakes--Roux. Delicate and Creamy=

    1 full tablespn. oil
    2 tablespns. bread flour
    ½ cup milk
    ½ cup water
    ½ cup flour
    ½ teaspn. salt
    2 eggs

Heat oil, add the 2 tablespns. flour, hot water and milk, boil well;
when cool, add salt, yolks of eggs and ½ cup of flour, beating; then
the stiffly-beaten whites of eggs; rest.

=Variations=

(_a_) 2 cups dry bread crumbs in place of the half cup of flour and
less or no salt.

(_b_) Add 2-4 cups of cold boiled hominy to plain batter and another ¼
cup of flour if necessary.

(_c_) Add 1½-2 cups cold boiled rice to plain cakes and a little more
flour if necessary.

(_d_) Add 1-1½ cup drained canned corn to plain cakes, more flour if
necessary.

(_e_) Add 4 tablespns. granular corn meal scalded with about ⅔ cup of
boiling water, to plain cakes.

=Crumb Griddle Cakes--no flour=

    1 cup milk
    1 cup dry crumbs
    ⅓ teaspn. salt
    1 egg

=Corn and Crumb Griddle Cakes--no eggs=

    ½ cup granular meal
    ½ cup boiling water
    1 teaspn. oil
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ¾ cup dry bread crumbs
    ¾ cup whole milk

Cool. If necessary, add ¼ cup more of milk.

=Rice Griddle Cakes--no flour=

    ½ cup rice
    3 eggs
    1 cup milk
    ½ teaspn. salt
    1 tablespn. oil

Boil rice in 2 cups water, partly cool, beat smooth with milk, add salt
and beaten eggs. Another yolk of egg may be used. If rice is thin, use
less milk.

=Hominy Griddle Cakes=

    ½ cup hominy
    3 eggs
    ⅓ cup milk
    1½ tablespn. oil
    salt

Cook hominy in 2 cups water and proceed as in Rice Cakes.

=Corn Meal Griddle Cakes--no flour=

    1 pt. granular meal
    1 teaspn. each butter, salt and sugar
    1 pt. boiling water
    ½-¾ cup cold milk
    2 eggs

Scald meal with boiling water, add butter, salt, sugar and cold milk,
then yolks of eggs; beat batter and fold in stiffly-beaten whites. Or,
beat eggs all together.

For Rhode Island meal, 1½ pt. boiling water will be required.

=Green Corn Batter Cakes=

    2 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    3 tablespns. flour
    ⅞ cup boiling water
    ½-¾ cup of grated or ground green corn
    1 teaspn. sugar if corn is not sweet
    3 tablespns. fine dry or toasted bread crumbs
    1 egg
    salt

Heat oil, add flour, then boiling water; remove from fire, add salt and
crumbs, cool, add corn and beaten egg. Bake on well oiled griddle.

=Nut Butter Griddle Cakes=

2 tablespns. almond, Brazil or other nut butter, 1 cup water, salt, 2
eggs, whites beaten separate, 1 cup bread flour.

=Nut and Egg Cakes=

For those who cannot take starchy foods.

Rub 2 tablespns. nut butter smooth with 2 full tablespns. of water; add
a beaten egg with salt. Bake on moderate griddle to delicate brown.

=Dough Breads=

Grind dough breads 5-8 times through a food cutter with the finest
plate instead of kneading; it saves time and strength and the breads
are better.

A good spring wheat graham flour makes better rolls than whole wheat
flour, but poor graham flour does not make good “anything.” The
simplest rolls are made with flour and water, with or without salt,
and require more thorough working than those made with shortening.
Rolls may be reheated whole, or be split and toasted.

Sticks and rolls may be mixed with milk instead of water.

All crackers and wafers (except fruit) should be crisped thoroughly in
the oven before serving.

=Plain Graham Rolls=

Put a cupful of ice water into a cold bowl. Add ¼ teaspn. of salt if
desired, but the rolls will have more of the sweet, nutty flavor of the
flour without it. Agitate the water until full of bubbles and sprinkle
in the cold flour as for gems. When the batter is too stiff to beat,
take it out on to a cold floured board and knead, using as little flour
as possible, until smooth and elastic. About 3 cupfuls of flour will be
taken up. Divide the dough, roll it quickly and evenly to about ¾ in.
in diameter, cut into 3 in. lengths and set in ice box to rest. Bake
in a moderate oven with steady heat until the rolls will not yield to
pressure between the thumb and finger and are of a delicate brown.

If preferred, the water may be poured over the flour and the dough
kneaded the same. The dough may rest before being rolled out.

The yolk of a hard boiled egg rubbed into each pint of flour makes more
tender rolls; or one beaten raw yolk may be added to each ¾ cup of
water.

=Nut Rolls=

Add ¾-1 cup of nut meal to water in plain rolls recipe.

=Cream Rolls=

Mix rich cold cream and graham flour together quickly. Press together
without kneading, rest for 2 hrs. or more, shape into rolls and bake,
or put on ice again until ready to bake.

Rolls may be kneaded, and if kneaded at all should be kneaded
thoroughly. Cocoanut cream may be substituted for dairy.

=★ Shortened Rolls=

The quantity of oil required will depend entirely upon the quality of
the flour, but for ordinary graham flour take ⅓ cup of oil to each pint
of flour; to a good spring wheat flour not more than ¼ cup. Rub the oil
into the salted flour, add ice water for moderately stiff dough, press
into a mass and set to rest, unless preferring to knead. Finish the
same as cream rolls. ⅓ white flour may be used with the graham.

=Fruit Rolls=

Roll shortened dough ¼ in. thick. Cut into strips 2½-3 in. wide, put a
strip of halves of stoned dates, pieces of nice fresh figs or a roll of
seeded and ground raisins along the length of the dough a little one
side of the center; slightly moisten the edge of the dough farthest
away from the fruit, lap the edge nearest, over the fruit and roll it
up in the dough, leaving a long roll with the fruit in the center; roll
over and over until the edge of the dough is well fastened down; cut
roll into 2 or 3 inch lengths (1 inch for some occasions); bake.

This way of putting the fruit in the roll has the advantage of leaving
no pieces of fruit sticking through the dough to be burned in baking,
and also of not having any “sad” portion of dough in the center of the
roll.

=Fruit and Nut Rolls=--may be made by adding pieces of nuts to the
fruit in the roll.

=Sticks=

Roll any of the roll doughs or the graham cracker dough to about the
size of a lead pencil or not over ⅓ of an inch in diameter; cut in 5-7
in. lengths, rest and bake the same as rolls. Sticks are more crisp and
delightful than rolls. They should be on the table for every meal.

=White Sticks=

Take 1-1½ tablespn. of oil to each cup of white bread flour, with a
trifle of salt, and water for stiff dough.

Dainty white sticks are nice to serve with soups, salads and some
desserts.

=Porridge Sticks.=

    1 cup cold, thick oatmeal porridge
    1 tablespn. oil
    salt
    ½ cup graham flour
    1¼ cup white flour

Mix and knead thoroughly. Dough must be very stiff.

=Beaten Biscuit--Whole Wheat=

    1 qt. true whole wheat flour
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ⅓ cup oil
    1 scant cup ice water, about

Rub salt and oil with flour, add water, knead until smooth (the dough
should be very stiff), then separate dough into several pieces and put
it through the food cutter 6 or 8 times. This takes the place of the
laborious beating. Shape into small thick biscuit; make a hole through
the center of each one from the top with the thumb or finger, rest;
bake thoroughly in moderate oven.

If you have time to form the biscuit you will be well repaid for your
trouble as they are so beautiful; but if your time is limited, roll the
dough ½-1 in. thick, cut with small round cutter and prick with fork.
You may even cut the dough into small squares. Rolled very thin, cut
with a large cutter and pricked well, the dough makes nice wafers. If a
food cutter is not at hand, beat with a mallet or the rolling pin, or
pick apart with the thumb and fingers, over and over again, until the
dough snaps when pulled apart.

A cup of medium thick cream may be used instead of oil and water.

=Maryland Beaten Biscuit=

    1 qt. white flour
    1 teaspn. salt
    2-4 tablespns. oil or 1-2 tablespns. butter,
    (use only ½ teaspn. salt with butter)
    ¾-⅞ cup of ice cold milk or water, or half of each

Proceed as with whole wheat biscuit.

=Maryland Biscuit--Unbeaten=

    1 qt. whole wheat or white flour
    salt
    4 tablespns. oil or melted butter
    cold water or milk for stiffest possible dough

Knead 20 m., or until dough blisters; set aside 1-2 hrs., or over
night; knead 5-10 m., roll and cut, or shape by hand. Bake.

=★ White Crackers=

    1 qt. bread flour
    4 tablespns. oil, or 2 of oil and 1 of butter (2 of melted butter)
    salt
    cold milk for very stiff dough

Knead until smooth, run through food cutter 6-8 times, or beat or pick
as beaten biscuit; rest, roll thin, prick dough all over, cut into any
desired shape, bake in moderate oven. ¼ or ½ of pastry flour may be
used; also water and a little more shortening.

=Swedish Milk Biscuit=

Make white crackers of milk, roll as thin as paper, prick, cut into
biscuit the size of a saucer. Turn the wafers on the tins often while
baking. Serve with some desserts, fruit or other salads, and with
cottage cheese. Cut a hole in the center of some of the biscuit before
baking and serve salads or suitable meat dishes on them in individual
servings.

=Cocoanut Wafers=

    2½ cups pastry flour
    1 cup dessicated cocoanut
    2 tablespns. butter or 3 of oil
    salt
    water

Rub butter into flour, add salt and mix with cocoanut which has been
ground through a food cutter. Add ice water for stiff dough, roll out
at once or rest before rolling as preferred. Bake carefully so as not
to scorch the cocoanut. Dried grated cocoanut of your own preparing is
preferable. 2 cups of cocoanut may be used.

If a sweet wafer is desired, add sugar to the dough or sprinkle with
sugar before baking.

=Fruit Bars=

Roll any desired dough thin, cut into 3-3½ in. strips, spread one half
of the width with stoned dates, halved raisins, steamed figs, sweet
prunes or any suitable fruit, which has been cut into strips with the
shears; moisten the edge next to the fruit, fold the other half of
the dough over, pressing the edges well together, and roll lightly to
flatten the bar; cut with a sharp knife into 2½-3 in. lengths.

Add nuts to make fruit and nut bars, or make nut bars sometimes. The
dough may be slightly sweetened.

=Crackers with Nuts=

Brush baked crackers with beaten white of egg and spread thick with
chopped or coarse ground nuts (English walnuts or pecans or both). Put
into warm oven to dry.

These crackers are nice to serve with fruit or vegetable salads, or
with cereal coffee or tea-hygiene.

=Graham Crackers--Sweet=

    2 cups each graham and white flour
    ½ cup butter or oil
    ¼ cup sugar
    ½ teaspn. salt
    cold water for stiff dough

Mix well together, run through food cutter (with finest knife) 5 or 6
times, roll about ⅛ in. thick, prick with fork, cut into any desired
shape, set in cold place for 2 hrs. or longer, bake in moderate oven.

Omit sugar for unsweetened crackers. Dough may be kneaded, picking it
apart into small pieces, if food cutter is not at hand. Or, crackers
are very good made up without any kneading, when rested in cold place.

=★ Sour Cream Crackers=

    ⅔ cup thick sour cream
    2 tablespns. oil
    ½ teaspn. salt
    pastry flour for rather stiff dough

Rest and finish as other crackers. If the cream is not rich, use more
oil.

=Nut Wafers=

    ½-1 cup fine chopped or ground nuts
    1 pt. flour, graham or white, or half of each
    ¼ teaspn. salt
    water for stiff dough

Finish the same as graham crackers. Nice with fruit soups.

=Fruit Wafers=

Roll any of the cracker doughs thin, place figs, dates, raisins or
prunes cut in thin pieces with the shears, on the dough, cover with
another thin layer of dough, roll with rolling pin to press all
together, prick with fork, cut in squares, rest, bake.

=★ Oat Cakes=

1 part oil, 2 parts water, salt, coarse oat flour to knead. Roll ¼
in. thick of size to fit pie pan, crease in quarters, rest; bake in
moderate oven. The dough may be cut into crackers if preferred. Grind
rolled oats or oatmeal in food cutter, to make the flour.

=★ Graham Crisps or Flakes=

Prepare dough as for plain graham rolls, kneading very stiff. After
resting, separate into small pieces and roll each piece as thin as
paper. When all are rolled, put as many as convenient into a hot oven
on perforated pans or on the grate of the oven. Turn them over on the
pans often while baking and bake to a delicate brown. Serve whole or in
broken pieces.

This is one of the most delicate and digestible of unleavened breads
and has a crispness and nutty flavor peculiarly its own. It should
be one of the staple articles of food in our homes and is especially
adapted to school, picnic and travelling lunches.

=Cream Crisps=

Mix with thin cream instead of water and bake in slower oven than water
crisps. With cream, whole wheat or white flour may be used, as well as
graham.

=Nut Crisps=

Use nut roll dough, kneading it very stiff. Beaten biscuit dough may
also be used for shortened crisps.

=Cocoanut Crisps=

Use equal quantities of desiccated cocoanut and pastry flour, with
water or milk for liquid.

=Nut Straws=

Take equal quantities of any nut meal and pastry flour, with a little
salt. Add just enough ice water to make the particles hold together,
roll out without kneading to ¼ in. thick, then cut into strips ¼ in.
wide and 5-8 in. long. Bake in quick oven to delicate cream color.
Serve tied with narrow ribbon in bunches of 3-5 with individual plates
of salad or on celery dish. ⅔ nut meal and ⅓ flour may be used for
richer straws.

=Unleavened Bread for Communion=

    2 cups pastry flour
    2½-3 tablespns. olive oil
    ½ teaspn. salt
    ⅓ to scant ½ cup of ice water

Mix salt, flour, and oil together, add enough ice water for stiff
dough, press together as for pie crust and set in refrigerator an hour
or longer. Roll dough three-sixteenths of an inch thick, prick all over
with a fork, mark off in nine-sixteenth-inch squares by a rule, cut
into convenient sized pieces for baking. Lay on a pan or perforated
sheet, then crease marked squares half through the dough with a spatula
or the back of a knife. Bake very carefully in a moderate oven.

1½-2 tablespns. of butter may be used instead of the oil, but olive oil
seems more suitable for the purpose.




SANDWICHES


Bread for sandwiches should be of fine even grain and twenty-four hours
old, except for rolled sandwiches, then it must be moist enough to be
pliable.

Sometimes it is well to wrap the loaves to be used for sandwiches in
damp cloths for three or four hours before preparing.

Dip the knife into hot water for slicing moist bread.

Thin, fresh crisped crackers or wafers are nice for sandwiches
when they are to be served right away, so they will not lose their
crispness. Wafers of pastry are suitable for some sandwiches.

Small round tins, like baking powder cans, are nice to bake bread in
for sandwiches. Be careful not to bake it too hard.

Do not cut the crust from the bread as a rule; it is the sweetest and
most wholesome part of the bread and the slices look so “naked” without
it.

Unless the loaf is of the regular sandwich style, cut it in two in the
middle, spread each cut surface, if butter is to be used, and cut off
a thin slice from each half loaf. Cover one slice with the sandwich
filling and lay the other on top of that, pressing well together. Cut
into triangles, squares or strips. Continue cutting slices from each
half loaf, then they will fit.

Cream (not melt) the butter before spreading; it may have chopped
parsley, onion or lemon juice or other flavorings worked into it.

For rolled sandwiches, the crust will have to be cut off unless it is
very pliable. Cut slices thin, spread with the desired filling and roll
as close as possible. If they should not stay together well, fasten
with sharp pointed Japanese toothpicks. They may be tied with baby
ribbon.

Steam figs, seeded raisins and dates and grind in food cutter for sweet
sandwiches.

Scrambled eggs are better in sandwiches than hard boiled. Hard boiled
eggs may be rubbed to a paste in a mortar, with butter and salt.

When mayonnaise dressing is used, put sandwiches together just before
serving.

Onion sandwiches, when carried, must be packed in a close covered box
by themselves.

To keep moist, cover plate with lettuce leaves, lay sandwiches on and
cover with dampened lettuce leaves. Or, cover plate of sandwiches
with a towel wrung out of cold water and set in cool place. Or, wrap
sandwiches in a damp napkin or waxed paper and place in close covered
tin box or stone jar and set in cool place. It is better to have
everything ready and put the sandwiches together just before serving.

_Garnishing_--Sandwiches are much more attractive if a few sprays of
parsley are placed around the edges before the second slice of bread
is laid on. Sprigs of celery or small spinach leaves may be used, or a
narrow strip of lettuce may be laid around the edges, so that it will
look like a dainty ruffle of green.

Sweet sandwiches may be served with cereal coffee, tea-hygiene, egg
drinks or egg creams.

Plates of sandwiches may be garnished with chervil, parsley, lettuce,
celery or carrot tops, ferns, leaves or flowers.


FILLINGS FOR SANDWICHES

Salt understood

=Eggs=--Scrambled without liquid, rather soft, served hot or cold.

Hard boiled, while warm minced with fork and mixed with butter and salt.

Hard boiled, sliced, between slices of bread spread with thick, rich
cream sauce; chopped parsley, with or without celery or onion.

Scrambled or hard boiled (if hard boiled, rubbed through wire
strainer), mixed with improved mayonnaise dressing.

=Nuts=--Chopped black walnut meats mixed with peanut butter which has
been blended with a little water or tomato.

Almond butter on bread, minced tarragon, drained red raspberry and ripe
red currant pulp sweetened, between.

Chopped almonds, basil, sliced or chopped peaches, sugar.

Butternuts or pine nuts, rolled; bread, crackers or Boston brown bread.

★ Nut butter, roasted or steamed, blended with water and mixed with
chopped ripe olives, no salt.

Nut butter blended with strained tomato and mixed with sliced ripe
olives.

★ Nut butter, roasted or steamed, water, chopped soaked dried olives,
on crackers.

Nut butter, and tomato pulp.

★ Pine nuts, butter or rolled; tomato pulp, with or without chopped
soaked dried olives, on crackers.

=Trumese=--Trumese ⅔, nutmese ⅓, mince together with fork, add a little
pdrd. leaf sage or fine sliced celery sometimes.

Minced, between slices of bread spread with tart jelly. Sage sometimes.

And celery salad, trumese minced and celery cut very fine.

Minced and mixed with thick, rich cream sauce.

Olive oil and lemon juice.

=Nutmese=--or steamed nut butter, and cream (sweet or sour); mix to
paste, add onion juice, and if desired, lemon juice; celery sometimes
without lemon juice. Bread or crackers.

Or unroasted nut butter, chopped or sliced onions and improved
mayonnaise dressing.

Minced, on bread, stewed green peas between.

Sliced, on one slice of bread and tart jelly on the other, press
together.

=Ripe Olives=--Sliced, between slices of bread spread with improved
mayonnaise dressing. Also ripe olives and tomato, chopped, mixed with
cracker dust.

=Legumes=--Lima beans, mashed with butter.

Peas, green, mashed very dry with celery or celery salt and cream.

Beans, crushed or mashed, sliced cucumbers, oil; lemon juice sometimes.

Chick peas or lentils, mashed, dry; mushrooms dried or fresh, cooked in
a little water with butter, chopped, added with liquid to peas.

=Cottage Cheese=--Soft, creamy, with or without chopped or sliced ripe
olives; white, whole wheat or Boston brown bread or crackers.

Spread on slices of rye bread (made with or without caraway), with
pecan meats between, with or without celery.

=Boston Brown Bread=--Whipped cream, butter or oil (not forgetting
salt); sliced cucumbers. Brazil nut, almond or pine nut butter may be
used.

Roasted peanut butter and sliced figs or dates.

=Spinach=--Tender fresh leaves, cut fine, a few delicate whole ones
around edge, with any preferred dressing.

=Celery=--Brazil nut butter on bread or crackers; sliced, crisp celery
between.

=Tomato=--Thin slices of tomato between slices of bread spread with
improved mayonnaise dressing. A little chopped onion sometimes.

=Cucumber=--Substitute cucumber for tomato in above.

=Mayonnaise=--Improved--Flavor with onion, chives, parsley, fresh thyme
or tarragon, or combinations of same and spread on bread or crackers.

=Onion=--Slice fine, let stand in ice water ½ hour or more, changing
water 2 or 3 times. Drain and dry in clean towel and place with parsley
leaves between slices of bread spread with mayonnaise dressing, or nut
or dairy butter or salted oil.

=Carrot and Celery, or Onion=--Grated raw carrot and fine sliced celery
or onion, French or mayonnaise dressing.

=Scented--Clover=--Place blossoms in bottom of tureen, lay on loaf of
bread from which the crusts have been trimmed and cover with blossoms.
Cover and set in cool place for 12 hours or longer. Wrap butter in
cheese cloth and put into another dish the same way. These sandwiches
are simply bread and butter. Mignonnette, violets, nasturtiums, rose
leaves or any highly scented flowers or leaves may be used.

=Brown and White=--Lay together three slices of buttered white bread
and two of graham or rye, alternating. Set in cold place with gentle
pressure for an hour or more. Slice to serve.

=Sweet--Better than Cake=--Spread crackers or thin universal biscuit
with butter and honey.

English walnuts, raisins, sugar, white of egg, vanilla; put between
crackers and heat in oven.

Brazil nuts, pecans or almonds, with figs or dates.

Orange pulp, shredded mint, sugar, sweet dressing or whipped cream.

Grated or desiccated cocoanut, moistened with cream, with sliced or
ground dates, figs or raisins and vanilla.

Equal quantities chopped dates and raisins; grape juice to moisten.

Almond butter, sugar or not, vanilla, ground or fine sliced citron.

Butternuts or nut butter, date, fig or raisin pulp, crackers or pastry
wafers.

Thin slices of banana between slices of bread spread with cream and
honey mixed, with or without a few chopped nuts. Sponge cake instead of
bread, sometimes.

Quince jelly, chopped hickory or pecan nut meats.

Boston brown bread, raisins or dates, English walnuts or pecans,
cocoanut cream or Brazil nut butter, or no butter.

Pastry crust, prick with fork, cut in any desired shape, bake; spread
with chopped almonds mixed with peach marmalade or any desired sweet or
jelly and put two pieces together.

=Rolled=--Plain or scented bread and butter.

Figs steamed, ground, cream and vanilla.

Roll buttered bread from corner over slender stalks of crisp celery.
The small inside stalks are preferable. Turn the leaf ends of the
stalks so that they will show at each end of the roll. A lengthwise
strip of cucumber may be substituted for the celery, and parsley used
for garnish.


OPEN SANDWICHES--CANAPES

These are daintily arranged bits of bread cut into rounds, ovals or any
fancy shape; sometimes toasted on one side; served most suitably at a
luncheon or supper and eaten with a fork. Crackers are more suitable
for some coverings. Much taste may be displayed in the arrangement of
canapes.

=Mushroom Canapes=

Toast rounds of bread on one side, lay toasted side down on individual
plates and cover the other side with chopped mushrooms cooked in a
small quantity of water with butter, and lay one small broiled mushroom
(or one that has been cooked the same as the chopped), cup side up, in
the center. Garnish with lettuce, chervil, spinach or parsley.

=Trumese and Egg Canape=

Moisten hashed trumese with a little rich cream or brown sauce. Toast
diamonds of bread on one side and dip the other side in melted butter.
Scramble eggs soft and fine and place in center of toast, diamond
shape, then cover the remainder of the toast with the trumese, making
a diamond shaped border of it. Lay a piece of green string bean cut
in diamond shape in the center; set in the oven a moment, serve on
individual plates.

=Indian Canapes=

Mince trumese salad entrée fine and rub hard boiled yolks of eggs with
some of the dressing; spread on untoasted side of strips of bread or
thin wafers. Garnish plate with slices of lemon and tomato sprinkled
with chopped parsley or with a leaf of parsley or spinach on each.

=Russian Canapes=

Drain Chili sauce and rub through strainer, place pulp in center of
large wafer, surround with salted, riced yolk of hard boiled egg,
finishing with a wreath of the riced white of egg sprinkled with
chopped parsley. A leaf of green may be laid in the center of the Chili
sauce. Toasted bread may be used.

=Cottage Cheese Canapes=

Cover crackers or circles of toast with creamy cottage cheese. Make a
border on cheese of small leaves of parsley and place a star or other
shape of boiled red beet or carrot in the center. Serve with lettuce
salad.

Ripe olives may be combined with cheese for canapes. Pastry wafers may
be used.

An oxeye daisy, p. 31, may be placed in center of canape, in the wreath
of parsley.

Sweet canapes may be prepared in great variety. The sandwich filling
of cocoanut moistened with cream, with dates, figs or raisins would
be very pretty if wafer were spread with the sweet pulp, then covered
with cocoanut decorated with citron or angelica and candied cherries in
fancy shapes or chopped. Pastry wafers would be especially suitable for
some of the sweet canapes.

=Sandwich à la Salade=

Roll strips of trumese salad entrée in crisp lettuce leaves, fasten
with Japanese toothpicks and serve on crackers or strips of zwieback or
with crescent sandwiches of bread and butter; or the salad without the
toothpick may be snugly rolled in a bread and butter or bread and oil
sandwich.

=Sister Starr’s Tomato Sandwich=

Chop together scrambled egg, oil and drained tomato (raw or canned),
not forgetting the salt, add cracker crumbs to make of the right
consistency and serve between crackers or slices of bread.

=Variegated Sandwiches=

Make three equal sized loaves of universal crust, one tinted a delicate
pink with fruit color, one left white, and the third made of part
graham flour with a little dark brown flour in the sponge.

When old enough, cut in slices, butter, pack together--brown, pink and
white--and set in refrigerator with weight on top.

To serve, cut in slices, then in any desired shape.

=English Bread and Butter Sandwiches=

Spread butter on loaf and cut in just as thin slices as possible roll,
fold, or place slices together.

=★ Trumese Sandwiches--non-starch=

Broil thin slices of trumese and place between them, scrambled eggs, or
fine sliced onions or celery; garnish.




MILK, CREAM, BUTTER AND CHEESE


“The time has not come to say that the use of milk and eggs should be
wholly discarded.”

“But because disease in animals is increasing, the time will soon come
when there will be no safety in using eggs, milk, cream or butter.”

“If milk is used, it should be thoroughly sterilized; with this
precaution there is less danger of contracting disease from its use.”

State Boards of Health and Experiment Stations declare that from
fifteen to thirty per cent. of the cows from which our cities draw
their milk supply are affected with tuberculosis. In one locality it
was found that 65 per cent. of the best milk that was presented was
tubercular.

“Examination has determined that cream has from 10 to 500 times as many
bacteria in a given quantity of milk as mixed milk. The bacteria nearly
all rise to the top with the cream.”--_“Life and Health,” April, 1909._

In considering the question of appendicitis, a writer in the _American
Medical Journal_ says: “The chief sources of tuberculosis infection of
the alimentary tract are the ingestion of milk, butter and cheese from
tuberculous cows....

“These authors (of the Experiment Station in Washington) consider that
a very large amount of butter infected with tubercle bacilli is daily
consumed by our people....

“Measure for measure, infected butter is a greater tubercular danger
than infected milk.... Tests show that in the ordinary salted butter of
commerce the Koch bacillus ‘may live and retain virulence practically
four and a half months or longer.’”

=To Pasteurize Milk=

Place a dairy thermometer, or one in an unpainted tin case, in the
milk; heat, preferably in double boiler, as quickly as possible, to a
temperature of not less than 140 degrees F. and keep it there for 40
m., or raise to 158 degrees F. for 10-20 m. Cool rapidly. The rapid
heating and cooling are necessary because a warm temperature is most
favorable for the development of germs and the spores of germs which
(spores) are not destroyed by this treatment of milk.

When milk is to be kept for several hours it should be heated in
air-tight bottles or in bottles which have stoppers of sterilized
cotton, by starting them in cold water and keeping them at a
temperature of 149 degrees F. for a half hour after bringing the water
to that point.

Pasteurizing milk does not give it the cooked taste that a higher
temperature does.

When it is not possible to carry out these directions, just bring milk
to the boiling point, or set bottles of milk or cream in cold water,
bring the water to boiling and boil for 10-20 m. Of course the bottles
should have something underneath them, to keep them from touching the
bottom of the vessel in which they are standing.

=To Sterilize Butter=

Boil butter in a generous amount of water thoroughly. Cool, remove from
the top of the water and drain.

=Sterilized Butter=

Pasteurize sweet cream the same as milk, cool quickly, let stand
covered in a cold place for at least 4 hrs; whip or beat in a deep
vessel, the inner cup of a double boiler or a pitcher, (some think it
easier to shake the cream in a tightly corked, wide mouthed bottle
or jar) until like whipped cream; then set the dish in slightly warm
water, to raise the temperature of the cream enough to cause the butter
to separate but not enough to make it oily. Remove the dish from warm
water just as soon as butter begins to separate; pour off buttermilk
and pour pure cold water over the butter. Work a little and pour water
off; next pour on water with a little salt (1 teaspn. to the quart)
and let it stand from 10 to 15 m. Remove butter to cold dish, add salt,
about ½ tablespn. to the pound, if unsalted butter is not preferred;
work a little, cover with a cloth wrung out of salt water, and let
stand a few hours in a clean airy place. Then work a little and shape
as desired. Do not work enough to spoil the grain and make the butter
oily.

This is the method with which I have had the best success. The regular
temperature for churning cream is from 58 to 60 degrees by the
thermometer. Sterilized butter should be made fresh every day.

“Protein is the most costly of the food ingredients and the one most
likely to be lacking in inexpensive meals, and is the nutrient which
skim milk supplies in a cheap and useful form.”--_R. D. Milner, Ph. B.
Farmers’ Bulletin, 363, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture._

“Sour milk is the safest form to use if milk is not Pasteurized,
as the acid of the milk kills all the germs except the lactic acid
germ.”--_Dr. Rand._

“People who cannot digest fresh milk or in whom it produces a feeling
of heaviness and discomfort, can eat large quantities of curdled milk
without inconvenience.”--_W. Brown, M. B., Ch. B., in Edinburgh Medical
Journal._

“Lactic acid precipitates the casein (clabbers the milk) but does not
affect the fats and salts. Its effect on the casein is to improve the
digestibility of this important compound, the meat element, which is
the most valuable constituent of milk.... As a matter of fact, sour
milk is really a more healthful food than sweet milk, digesting more
rapidly and more completely.”--_W. M. Esten, in Storr’s Bulletin, No.
59._

Directions for making artificial buttermilk come with the tablets and
preparations sold for that purpose.

As milk is a hearty food it should not be taken with other heavy foods
such as nuts, legumes or eggs, but with bread, zwieback, crackers or
rolls, parched or popped corn and other cereals.

Clear milk is coagulated by the gastric juice and should be taken
slowly, in small amounts, so that the acid may have a chance to mix
with it and form the curd in small particles. When drank rapidly, the
curd will form in large pieces and be difficult of digestion, often
causing distress and disease.

Some can digest sweet milk better if an acid is taken with it, but,
as a rule, such individuals would better take nut milk and cream,
preferably nuts, and plenty of juicy fruits.

In fact, considering the increase of disease among animals, it were
better for us all to be learning more and more how to prepare foods
without milk and eggs, _educating_ ourselves and others _away_ from
them.

The next thing to copper or re-tinned vessels for heating milk to the
boiling point without scorching, is a nice clean iron frying pan or
round bottomed iron kettle. I have used a stone milk crock.

Brush the inside of whatever dish milk is to be heated in with oil or
butter, as a still further precaution against scorching, for scorched
milk is unusable.

Wash all utensils used for milk first in cold water, then with warm
soapsuds, and then scald with perfectly boiling water. Wipe with clean
dry towels and if possible put them in the sun.

When hot water is poured into vessels before they are washed clean, the
casein is glued into the crevices, ready to make mischief with the next
lot of milk.

Condensed milk, containing cane sugar, is thought by many physicians
to be the cause of the great increase of diabetes, especially among
children.

A pinch of salt added to rather thin cream will cause it to whip up
light. Whip cream in a pitcher, the inner cup of a double boiler or
even in a tin can, something deep and small around. Of course the cream
and utensils should be very cold. Stop whipping while cream is smooth,
before it begins to have any rough appearance.

=Scalded, Devonshire or Clotted Cream=

Let milk stand undisturbed in a cool, well ventilated place for 12
hours in summer, 24 in winter. Then set the pan carefully in some place
over the fire where it will heat very slowly almost to the boiling
point; it must not boil. (It is better to set the pan in water which
will come up on the sides as high as the milk.) Let stand again in a
cool place for 12 hours or until thoroughly cooled. Divide with a knife
into squares, and skim by folding these squares over and over in rolls.
Set in a cool place. This is a most delightful substitute for butter on
bread, and it may also be used with cereals and fruits.

The cream may be placed by skimmerfuls in layers on a plate instead of
being rolled.


USES OF SOUR CREAM WITHOUT SODA

Sour cream may be used without soda in--Pie Crust; Shortcake Crust;
Dumplings for Pot Pies; Steamed Puddings, and all places where
universal crust is used; Salad Dressings in all places where sweet
cream is used; Soups, just before serving; Stewed Cabbage and Stewed
Tomatoes; Gravy; Macaroni; Cottage Cheese--much better than sweet
cream; Dominion Salad Dressing; Crackers; Cream Lemon Sauce; Lemon
Cream Sauce; Sauce Antique; Pie Filling and Cake Fillings. With Green
Peas, mixed with a little flour before putting it in, it can not be
distinguished from sweet cream; and the same with all vegetables with
which I have tried it excepting string beans: in those it tastes a
little tart. It may be poured over Trumese in half-loaves or in slices
to bake; and Whipped, when the slight tartness is desirable.


CHEESE

The process of “ripening” in cheese is a process of decay, and
poisonous ptomaines are often developed. I have no doubt but it would
be better if cheese were never taken into the human stomach. Our Father
has given us such an abundance of clean, wholesome foods to select from
that we can well afford to disregard the questionable ones.

=Cottage Cheese=

Skim a pan of well thickened sour milk, cut it carefully into 2-in.
squares and set into a cool oven on an iron ring, or something to keep
it from the bottom of the oven, and leave the door open. Turn the pan
occasionally but do not stir the milk. Be careful not to let it get too
warm. It should never be hot, only a little above blood heat. I have
sometimes made it in the summer by setting the pan in the sun. When the
curd and whey have separated, turn all into a bag and hang up to drain.
Do not drain the curd too dry. Season with sweet or sour cream and a
little salt; pile in a rocky mass in a glass dish and set in a cool
place.

Pass Chili sauce, Sauce Amèricaine or improved mayonnaise dressing with
it, in serving.

Thick strained stewed tomato may be used instead of or with the cream.

If milk is stirred while thickening or while heating, it will yield
only about ⅓ as much cheese as it would otherwise.

If properly made the cheese will be soft and creamy, instead of
rough, dry and tasteless. It should never be used in anything that is
to be raised to a high temperature, as that would make it hard and
indigestible.

Cottage cheese is a strong meat food, being the casein of the milk
separated from the water.

=Zeiger Cäse=

1 gallon fresh milk, 1 pt. thick sour milk, 3 eggs. Beat eggs, and sour
milk together and stir slowly into sweet milk just as it begins to
boil. When curd rises to top, skim into colander and drain.




DRINKS


“Two-thirds of all the patients that come to my office come because
they drink tea and coffee. When I can get them to give up tea and
coffee, they can get well.”--_Dr. Foote. Omaha._

Tea and coffee hinder the digestion of all the food elements, both
nitrogenous and carbonaceous. They cause extreme nervousness and
irritability.

“To a certain extent, tea produces intoxication.”

“The second effect of tea drinking is headache, wakefulness,
palpitation of the heart, indigestion, trembling of the nerves and many
other evils.”

“The influence of coffee is in a degree the same as that of tea, but
the effect upon the system is still worse.”

Theobromine, the essential element of cocoa and chocolate, is identical
with the thein and caffeine of tea and coffee.

“Some of the best authorities claim that the quantity of theobromine in
chocolate is greater than that of theine or caffeine in tea or coffee,
and also that in equal quantities, theobromine is a stronger drug than
caffeine or theine.”--_Dr. George._

A. B. Prescott, Ph. D., M. D., for many years Dean of the chemical
department of the University of Michigan, says in his “Organic
Analysis,” published by D. Van Nostrand Co., New York City in 1892, pp.
77 and 513: “Coffee contains 1 per cent. of caffeine.” “Dry cacao seeds
contain 1.5 per cent. of theobromine.” “The physiological effects of
theobromine are like caffeine but are obtained by smaller doses.”

The increasing use of chocolate and cocoa in and with everything is
alarming, and we feel that we must raise our voices in warning against
this “habit,” since many are innocent in regard to its nature.

“The use of unnatural stimulants is destructive to health and has a
benumbing influence upon the brain, _making it impossible to appreciate
eternal things_.”

As our bodies are made up so largely of water it is necessary to take
a sufficient amount to keep the tissues bathed and built up, but it
should not be taken with our meals, for solid foods cannot be digested
until the liquids have been absorbed, and when retained in the stomach
too long food _ferments_, making an _inebriate_ of the _water drinker_.

Fluids also dilute the digestive juices so that they lose their power
to act. Do not drink for a half hour or more before meals, or within 1
to 3 hours after--persons with slow digestion or subject to acidity, 3
hours.

If very cold or hot drinks are taken, the temperature at which
digestion is carried on is affected, causing another delay.

As a rule, the body gets the greatest benefit from water taken early in
the morning.

Pastor Kneipp recommended the use of small quantities of water (1
teaspoonful), often. If one is situated so as to be able to take a few
swallows frequently, it is better than to deluge the stomach three or
four times a day; as a steady, gentle rain is more beneficial than a
torrent.

Hot water, at one time the great panacea, is responsible for many
cases of serious indigestion by causing the muscles of the stomach to
relax and become weak. A cup of hot water occasionally, when one feels
that he has taken a little cold, will help to ward off the cold but it
should not be often repeated.

The advice of one doctor of great sense and considerable reputation was
“Drink cold water _when thirsty_.”

Pure _Distilled Water_ is unquestionably the best drink. _Mineral
Waters_ sometimes have a beneficial effect when used for a short
time, but that is lost by their continued use and after a few weeks
the individual begins to suffer with serious stomach and kidney
difficulties.

“_Very Hard Water_ is not only unpleasant to the skin and difficult
to make into a lather, but, what is more important still, it exerts a
more or less harmful influence upon the digestive system. Constipation
is not infrequently the direct result of the constant use of hard
water. Wherever possible apparatus should be used for the purpose of
distilling hard water. If this is impracticable, boiling the water will
materially reduce the hardness. The flatness of boiled water is easily
and quickly remedied by aerating it. Pouring water back and forth from
one glass to another will speedily restore its oxygen.”--_English Good
Health._

The liberal use of _Fresh Juicy Fruits_ helps out in the amount of
fluids. I have known a few people who ate no meat and almost no
vegetables, but did use juicy acid fruits in abundance, who never felt
the pangs of thirst, and they were in exceptionally good health, with
great powers of endurance.

The change of water in travelling affects many people unfavorably and
often it is difficult to obtain pure water. The substitution of juicy
fruits at such times banishes the difficulties.

=Fruit Nectars=

We make “fruit nectars” by adding lemon juice, sugar and water (the
less sugar the better, a sugar syrup is preferable) to pure fruit
juices and to combinations of fruit juices. Some, such as grape and
black raspberry, will bear a good deal of water, but pineapple and
other delicate flavored juices very little.

If pineapple is combined with another juice, let it be something
without a strong, positive flavor (as orange or strawberry), or the
pineapple juice will be wasted. A strong and a neutral flavored juice,
red raspberry and currant for instance, go well together. Lemon juice
gives character to all. Peach and grape juice, or apple and grape juice
are good combinations.

To fully enjoy the flavors, do not serve drinks ice cold.

=Banana Lemon Nectar=

_Syrup_--3-4 cups water, ½ cup sugar, boil; add ½ cup lemon juice,
cool. Cut 1 large banana in small pieces; pour syrup over, let stand in
refrigerator 2 hours or longer; strain or not; serve with thin slices
of lemon.

=Orange Banana Nectar=

Cut half a small orange into sections, rind and all and add to banana
syrup about 20 m. before serving. Before straining, put sections into
glasses, pour the strained syrup over them and serve.

=Orange Nectar=

Add sections of orange to lemon syrup without the banana.

=Mint Orange Nectar=

Add shredded mint to orange nectar.

=Lemonades=

Lemonade, with but little sugar, has no equal as a drink because of
the purifying effect of the lemon juice upon both the water and the
individual.

A strong lemonade requires less sugar in proportion than one having a
large quantity of water. A sugar syrup is best for sweetening, and the
less used the better.

_Mint_--Sprinkle fine cut spearmint into lemonade 10 to 15 m. before
serving. Very cooling and refreshing.

_Egg_--1 egg, 2 tablespns. sugar, 2½ tablespns. lemon juice, water to
make 2 glasses. Beat egg and sugar, add lemon juice and beat, then add
water.

_White of Egg_--2-2½ tablespns. lemon juice, white of 1 egg, 1
tablespn. sugar. Beat white of egg and sugar, add lemon juice, then
water.

_Milk and Egg_--1 egg, ¼-½ cup milk, 1 teaspn. or more lemon juice, a
little grated rind of lemon. Beat yolk of egg and add cold milk, turn
into glass; beat white of egg with a trifle of salt and add half the
lemon juice; add remainder of lemon juice to the yolk and milk, lay
white on top and serve at once.

=Egg Orangeade=

Beat the white of 1 egg with the juice of 1 large sweet orange, strain.

=To Prepare Fruit Juices=

The most desirable juices for drinks are made from fresh, ripe,
uncooked fruits by crushing, and straining through a cloth. It is
better to pour cold water over some fruits and let them stand for a
while before straining. Apples may be sliced or chopped and water added.

For canning fruit juices, see pp. 60, 61. The liquid from soaking
acid dried fruits in water for several hours (without cooking) is
refreshing; also the juice in which chopped raisins have been steeped.

=Cranberry Juice=

Crush or grind 1 qt. of cranberries, pour 1 qt. of boiling water over,
cool; add sugar after straining and stir until it is dissolved.

=Cereal Coffees or Drinks=

The bulk of the so-called “cereal” drinks on the market have some
commercial coffee in them, as well as chicory. There are a few,
however, made of combinations of grains, or of fruits, nuts and grains,
only. Those containing chicory require a long boiling, according to
the directions on the packages, to destroy the rank, harsh flavor of
the chicory; and the ones made of parched grains without caramel in
any form are improved by long steeping to develop the mild flavor. But
it is a great mistake to boil those having a characteristic, agreeable
flavor any more than we used to boil Java or Mocha. To make these,
put the cereal (from 1 teaspn. to 1½ tablespn. to each cup of water
according to taste) into perfectly boiling water, allow it to just boil
up, then stand on the back of the range where it cannot boil, for from
5-10 m. Serve with nice rich sterilized cream (hot better). When cream
is not obtainable and the drink must be served, hot scalded milk gives
a better flavor than unscalded milk, but as a rule, it is better to
omit the coffee when you have no cream.

Never make cereal coffee in a tin coffee pot that commercial coffee has
been made in. It would ruin the flavor.

We do not advise the drinking of even cereal coffee, but use it to win
people from injurious beverages.

=To Make a Cereal Drink=

It is very convenient to know how to make a cereal coffee, though if
one’s time is worth much and a good coffee is to be obtained, it is
cheaper to buy it. The following recipe is one that I have used for
years and it is excellent. None of the whole grains equal bran for the
drink.

    1 qt. wheat bran pressed down lightly
    1 pt. corn meal
    ½ cup hot water
    ⅔ cup nice-flavored dark molasses

Mix bran and corn meal and pour over them the molasses and hot water
which have been combined. Rub all together with the hands until smooth;
set in a warm oven and stir occasionally until well dried out, then
increase the heat of the oven, stirring the mixture often; at the last
have the oven very hot and stir almost constantly until cereal is a
dark chestnut brown, which will take but a short time at the last.
Remove from the oven and stir until cooled a little so that it will not
brown more by its own heat, and put into a close covered can.

When preparing to serve, use ½-1 cup of the coffee to each quart
of boiling water, let it just boil up and stand for 5 m. Different
combinations of grains are browned and ground for drinks. Barley is
much liked by some, rye by others. Carrot and celery roots dried and
browned are good, and browned peas are excellent.

=Tea-Hygiene=

Celery and raspberry leaf tea have been served in some of the
restaurants in New York City for several years and are both good.
Either the tops (fresh or dry) or seeds of celery may be used. Crush
the seeds before steeping. I have also used mint, anise, tarragon,
catnip and thyme for tea and found them all pleasant drinks. Steep them
for 15-20 m., strain and serve with cream only. You will be surprised I
am sure when you try them. Do not allow catnip tea to stand with the
leaves if to be re-heated.

=Bran Tea=

Brown bran delicately. Take 2 tablespns. for each cup of water, boil up
well or steep for 20 m. Dried unbrowned bran may be used with longer
cooking.

=Cold Cereal Coffee=

Pour hot coffee over cream or cream and sugar. Cool. For luncheon or
supper.

=Eggnog=

1 egg, ½-¾ cup of milk, 1 teaspn. or no sugar, flavoring or not. Beat
or shake until foamy, pour into glass and serve with or without whipped
cream on top. Eggnog does not necessarily contain liquor.

=Hot Eggnog=

Beat 1 egg with or without a teaspn. of sugar and a few drops of
vanilla. Pour ½-¾ cup of hot milk over, stirring. Turn into warm glass
and serve at once.

=Cream for Coffee=

Beat 1 egg to a foam, add 1 tablespn. white sugar and pour a pint of
boiling hot milk over, stirring briskly. Prepare at night for morning.

=Cream for Coffee No. 2=

Pour 1 pt. boiling milk on beaten yolk of 1 egg mixed with 2 tablespns.
cold milk. Set back on the stove to scald but not boil.

“Food should not be washed down. No drink is needed with the meals. Eat
slowly and allow the saliva to mingle with the food. Hot drinks are
debilitating. Do not eat largely of salt; give up bottled pickles; keep
fiery spiced food out of your stomach; eat fruit with your meals, and
the irritation which calls for so much drink will cease to exist. But
if anything is needed to quench thirst, pure water drunk some little
time before or after a meal is all that nature requires.”




INVALID FOODS


“Diet in the hands of an expert is far more effective than drugs. I
speak from a large experience in both systems.”--_“Food and Condition.”
Dr. Yorke Davis, London._

“In many cases of sickness the very best remedy is for the patient to
fast for a meal or two, that the overworked organs of digestion may
have an opportunity to rest.”

“A fruit diet for a few days has often brought great relief to brain
workers.”

“Many times a short period of entire abstinence from food, followed
by simple, moderate eating, has led to recovery through nature’s own
recuperative effort. An abstemious diet for a month or two would
convince many sufferers that the path of self-denial is the path to
health.”

“There are some who would be benefited more by abstinence from food
for a day or two every week than by any amount of treatment or medical
advice. To fast one day a week would be of incalculable benefit to
them.”


Suggestions

Whatever food is taken to the sick should be prepared and served
daintily and neatly. If the tray cloth is ever so coarse or only a
paper napkin, have it clean; use the daintiest and prettiest china to
be found and serve the food in small quantities, without any drops or
streaks on the edge of the dishes. A flower or leaf by the side of the
plate, will give zest to the food.

Food should be simple, nutritious and easily digested. Suitable dishes
are scattered all through the book. Among the soups are the broths
and others, supplying the needs of different cases. There are toasts
in variety; they may be served in delicate squares, triangles and
crescents.

Rice flour blanc mange, sea moss blanc mange, buttermilk, parched
grains, egg creams, fruit whips and ices are suggestive of some of the
especially suitable dishes. Fruits and fruit juices are nearly always
indicated. Baked apples, sweet and sour, without sugar, are staple
invalid dishes. Before serving grapes, remove the seeds with two silver
forks on a plate, then put the pulp and juice into a sauce dish or
glass. Serve the pulp only, of oranges. (p. 42.)

The most desirable gruels are those made of the dextrinized or parched
cereals, but when the undextrinized grains are used they should be
cooked as long as for porridges, in a somewhat larger quantity of
water, strained, and thinned with milk, or cream and water. They may
sometimes be cooked in milk. Cold porridges may be used.

=Granella Malted Milk Gruel=

    1-1½ tablespn. granella
    2-3 teaspns. malted milk
    2 tablespns. thin cream
    salt
    water

Cook granella in water to soften, strain, add malted milk, cream and
salt which have been blended; heat, serve.

=Egg Gruel=

Poached yolks of 3 eggs, 1-2 cups milk. Rub yolks of eggs smooth, add
hot milk, gradually, strain, reheat, salt, serve.

=Parched Corn Broth=

Pour hot milk over parched corn meal or cracked parched corn; let stand
5-10 m., strain. May use water and cream.

=Almond Gruel=

1 tablespn. almond butter, 1 cup water, salt. Mix butter with water,
add salt, boil, serve.

=Raisin Gruel=

Boil 1½ cup raisins in 1 qt. milk and water, equal parts, for ½ hour;
strain, squeezing well, thicken with 1-2 teaspns. flour blended with
water, add salt.

=White of Egg=

Dissolve the whites of 2 or 3 eggs in a glass of water and give a few
teaspoonfuls every 2 or 3 hours.




CONFECTIONS


“Sugar clogs the system. It hinders the working of the living machine.”

Children are not naturally fond of sweets, but with few exceptions
their taste has been educated to them from the cradle. I have known
children who were so unaccustomed to candies that if they were given
them they would merely play with them, never thinking of putting them
into their mouths, and others who would say when a sweet dessert was
given them, “I don’t like that, it is too sweet.”

Much life-long suffering would be avoided if children were given
plenty of good ripe fruit, sweet and sour, instead of confections. If,
however, it seems best sometimes to make something in this line, select
the simplest and least harmful.

=Stuffed Dates=

Mix unsalted roasted nut butter with powdered sugar and a little
vanilla, form into pieces the size and shape of date stones and put
inside each date; roll in sugar or not, serve on grape or maple leaves.

Serve with wafers, or with rolls and cereal coffee, sometimes.

Almond or Brazil nut butter may be used instead of peanut butter, and
rose or other flavoring. Grated cocoanut may be mixed with the almond
butter. Fill the dates with marshmallow paste for Marshmallow Dates.

=Cream Stuffed Dates=

Make a roll the size of the stone of confection cream and insert in
date. The roll may be larger and allowed to show in the opening.

=Stuffed Figs=

Stuff pulled figs by removing the inside and mixing it with sweetened
and flavored nut butter or with coarse chopped English walnuts,
almonds and pecans, one or all, and replacing in the skin.

Pile in the center of a dessert plate and surround with sticks or
beaten biscuit. Serve with or without cereal coffee.

=Stuffed Prunes=

Soak and steam choice, plump California prunes until tender, cover
close until cool, remove stones and fill space with a paste made
by kneading together almond butter, white of egg and powdered or
confectioner’s sugar.

=Sweetmeats--Fruits and Nuts=

1 part each Brazil nuts, almonds and hickory nuts or filberts or
English walnuts, and 1 or 2 parts raisins, figs or dates. Grind fruit
through finest cutter of mill and mix with nut butter or meal or
chopped nuts. Form into caramel shape, small rolls or cones, or into
a large roll and slice. Two or more of the sweet fruits may be used,
sometimes a little citron. Or, 3 parts chopped hickory nut meats, 2
parts figs and other fruits.

=A Sweetmeat--Fruits=

1 lb. each of figs, from which the stems and hard part have been cut,
stoned dates and raisins; mix and grind through food cutter; sprinkle
board with confectioner’s sugar, knead mixture, roll to ½ in. thick,
cut into any desired shape and size and roll in sugar.

=Kisses=

Whites of 6 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar. Beat the whites of eggs with
a little salt, adding the sugar gradually while whipping until the
mixture is stiff enough to hold its shape; add flavoring if desired and
drop by spoonfuls on to paraffine paper laid on boards of a size to
fit the oven, or on baking tins. Dry in warm oven for about an hour,
then brown slightly. If the oven is too warm, they may now be put into
the warming oven or on a shelf over the stove until thoroughly dried.
If the kisses stick to the paper, turn them over and moisten the paper
slightly and they will come off in a little while.

=Cocoanut Candy=

2 cups granulated sugar, ½ cup milk, 1 cup shredded cocoanut. Boil
sugar and milk together for 4 m., add cocoanut, flavor to taste and
cool in buttered tins.

=Candy Puffs=

    2 cups sugar
    1 cup water
    whites 2 eggs
    1 cup chopped nuts
    flavoring

Boil sugar and water till they spin a heavy thread, then pour the
syrup over the stiffly-beaten whites of the eggs, stirring constantly.
When all the syrup is in, beat until the mass begins to harden; add
flavoring and nuts, mix thoroughly and place by teaspoonfuls on
buttered plates.

=Confection, or Bonbon Cream=

Beat the white of an egg to a stiff froth, add gradually 8 tablespns.
sifted powdered sugar, beat well together and flavor with vanilla or
any desired flavoring. Or, one half its bulk of water may be added to
the white of egg without beating, with enough confectioner’s sugar to
make stiff enough to mold into balls. Different colors and flavorings
may be used in cream.

=Nut Creams=

Halve English walnut or pecan meats and put confection cream between
the halves; press together and set away to harden.

=★ Confection Potatoes=

Add a little cocoanut to second confection cream, and form into small
potato shapes, making dents for eyes; roll in fine powdered coriander
or anise seed, or in brown sugar with a little anise mixed with it.

=Marshmallows=

    4 oz. gum arabic
    1 cup water
    1¼ cup powdered sugar
    whites of 3 eggs
    2 teaspns. orange flower water or 1 of vanilla
    corn starch
    confectioner’s sugar

Another recipe gives 2 cups powdered sugar and the white of 1 egg only,
with the other ingredients.

Soak the gum arabic in the water until soft, strain into inner cup of
double boiler, add sugar and cook, stirring until thick and white. Try
in ice water and when it will form a firm, not hard, ball, remove from
the fire and chop and beat in the stiffly-whipped whites of the eggs
with the flavoring. Turn the paste into a shallow pan covered thick
with corn starch, leaving it 1 inch in thickness. When cool or in about
12 hours, cut into inch cubes, dust with confectioner’s sugar and pack
in boxes. Marshmallows are better to be made as soft as they can be
handled.

=Old Fashioned Molasses Candy=

2 cups molasses, 2 cups granulated sugar, 1 tablespn. butter. Boil
over not too hot fire until a little will harden as soon as it drops
into cold water. Pour into buttered tins and pull when cool enough to
handle. Candy may have hickory nut or black walnut meats pressed into
it when partly cooled, without pulling.

The most important thing for the candy is to get a good flavored
molasses. The real Porto Rico is best. Do not be induced to add soda to
the syrup. It spoils the rich golden color which belongs to molasses
candy, besides making it more unwholesome. Brush the kettle with butter
before putting ingredients in.

=Everton Taffy=

    1 large cup New Orleans molasses
    1½ cup lightest brown sugar
    ½ cup butter
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Boil until a little dropped in water will make fine, brittle threads;
pour into buttered pans ¼-⅓ in. thick and cut in squares.

=Lemon Taffy--to pull=

    2 cups sugar
    1 cup water
    2 tablespns. lemon juice
    2 or 3 drops lemon extract

Boil sugar and water until nearly done; add lemon juice and cook until
a little will harden in cold water; flavor and turn on to buttered
plate. Fold the edges toward the center as they cool and pull as soon
as cool enough to handle.

=Penosia=

    3 cups light brown sugar
    1 cup milk or cream
    1 tablespn. butter
    1 lb. English walnuts (1½ cup chopped)
    1 teaspn. vanilla

Shell, blanch and chop the walnuts; boil sugar and milk until syrup
will harden when dropped into water but will not become brittle; just
before it is done, add the butter and vanilla; then the chopped nuts,
stirring them in well; pour into buttered pans and with sharp knife
mark off the squares. Cool.

Another recipe says dark brown sugar and ½ cup only of cream.

=Lozenges--Wintergreen or Peppermint=

    2 cups granulated sugar
    ½ cup water
    4-6 drops true oil of wintergreen, or 3 drops oil of peppermint

Boil sugar and water rapidly for 5 m. after they begin to boil, add
the flavoring and remove from the fire. Stir briskly until the mixture
begins to thicken and to have a whitish appearance, then drop on to a
cold tin dish, oiled paper or a marble slab as fast as possible, in as
large or small lozenges as desired. If the mixture hardens too rapidly,
set the dish in a pan of hot water. Do not place the lozenges so close
that they will run together. The wintergreen drops may be tinted pink
with fruit color.

=Maple Candy Cream=

    3 cups grated maple sugar
    1 cup cream
    1 teaspn. butter

Boil all together for 12 m., pour into another dish, stir until mixture
thickens, pour into buttered tins and cut in squares.

=Hoarhound Candy=

3 cups water, 2 oz. dried hoarhound, 3 lbs. (2¼ qts.) brown sugar.
Steep the dried herb in the water for a half hour; strain, add the
sugar and boil until a little will harden when dropped in cold water;
pour on to buttered tins and when sufficiently cool cut into sticks
with oiled knife.




MEALS AND MENUS


“Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in
the morning!”

“Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy
princes eat in due season, for strength and not for drunkenness.” Eccl.
10:16, 17.

Many have been greatly benefited by eating the first meal, breakfast,
3-5 hours after rising, according to their work.

“Eat only when hungry, drink only when thirsty.”--_E. H. D._

“Three meals a day and nothing between meals, not even an apple should
be the utmost limit of indulgence. Those who go further violate
nature’s laws and will suffer the penalty.”

“If you would give it a trial, you would find two meals better than
three.”

“The stomach, when we lie down to rest, should have its work all done,
that it may enjoy rest as well as other portions of the body. The
work of digestion should not be carried on through any period of the
sleeping hours. If you feel that you must eat at night, take a drink of
cold water and in the morning you will feel much better for not having
eaten.”

“It is not well to eat fruit and vegetables at the same meal. If the
digestion is feeble, the use of both will often cause distress, and
inability to put forth mental effort. It is better to have the fruit at
one meal and the vegetables at another.”

As a rule, it is better to serve fruits at the close of a meal.

“In order to have healthy digestion, food should be eaten slowly.... If
your time to eat is limited, do not bolt your food, but eat less and
eat slowly.”

Masticate food to creaminess. “Enjoy to the full every mouthful of food
as long as any taste remains in it.”--_C. C. H._

“Custom has decided that the food shall be placed upon the table in
courses. Not knowing what is coming next, one may eat a sufficiency
of food which perhaps is not the best suited to him. When the last
course is brought on he often ventures to overstep the bounds and take
the tempting dessert, which, however, proves anything but good for
him. If all the food intended for a meal is placed on the table at the
beginning, one has opportunity to make the best choice.”

For some time I have practised either putting the food all on the table
or having what was not on the table in sight on the sideboard, or
letting guests know in some way the full menu, as I have always felt
that while teaching temperance, we were encouraging intemperance by the
customary manner of serving.

When working hard, eat light; do not overwork the whole body at the
same time.

Perfect rest without sleep for 15-30 m. after meals is a great aid to
digestion.

“We should not provide for the Sabbath a more liberal supply or a
greater variety of food than for other days. Instead of this, the food
should be more simple and less should be eaten in order that the mind
may be clear and vigorous to comprehend spiritual things. Overeating
befogs the brain. The most precious words may be heard and not
appreciated because the mind is confused by an improper diet.”

“Do not have too great a variety at a meal; three or four dishes are a
plenty. At the next meal you can have a change. The cook should tax her
inventive powers to vary the dishes she prepares for the table, and the
stomach should not be obliged to take the same kinds of food meal after
meal.”

Three or four dishes, each perfect of its kind, are more satisfying
than a great number, not one of which is perfectly prepared and served.


MENUS

The suggestive menus given will admit of variation according to the
season and circumstances.

Nut, olive or cooking oil with salt; nut butter of any kind; or cream,
may be used instead of dairy butter.

Macaroni baked in cream sauce left from dinner may be heated and served
for the next morning’s breakfast with the addition of tomato or more
milk.

Where the two pies are served for dessert, two small pieces should be
served on one plate. They introduce to the guests two kinds of crust
without lard, and mince pie without meat.

When a hearty soup or dessert are on the menu the other dishes of the
meal may be lighter.

Dainty dishes and spotless linen, will have much to do in fitting for
that city which has foundations of precious stones and the paving of
whose streets is gold.


BREAKFAST

    =First Day=

    Baked Macaroni in Cream or Tomato Sauce
    Bread and Butter or Cream
    Whole Wheat Wafers
    Apples and Oranges

    =Second Day=

    Corn Omelet
    Whole Wheat Gems
    Apple Sauce
    Graham Sticks

    =Third Day=

    Rye Meal Porridge--Nut or Dairy Cream
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fresh or Canned Blueberries
    Molasses Cookies

    =Fourth Day=

    Soft Poached Eggs on Broiled Trumese
    or
    Cutlets of Roast with Brown Gravy
    Parker House Rolls
    Cranberry Sauce
    Crisps

    =Fifth Day=

    Cutlets of Corn Meal Porridge or
    Rhode Island Johnny Cakes with Gravy No. 44 or 50
    Scrambled Eggs
    Bread and Butter or Cream
    Graham Sticks
    Bananas
    (Cutlets plain at first and with maple syrup at last of meal)

    =Sixth Day=

    Trumese Hash
    Swedish Milk Biscuit
    Baked Doughnuts
    Cereal Coffee
    (Cream Toast may be added)

    =Seventh Day=

    Nut Rolls
    Canned Peaches or Baked Sweet Apples
    with or without Almond or Dairy Cream
    Apples or Bananas
    Fruit Bars or Wafers
    (Granella with cream or hot milk may be added)


DINNER

    =First Day=

    Mashed Lentils--Cream Sauce
    Baked Potatoes
    Boiled or Stewed Cabbage--salt and oil
    Bread and Nut or Dairy Butter
    Corn Pone or Water Corn Bread
    Squash or Pumpkin Pie

    =Second Day=

    Vegetable Consomme--Soup Balls
    Peanut Pie
    Stewed Corn
    Celery or Lettuce Mayonnaise
    Bread and Butter or Oil
    Graham Sticks
    Tapioca Jelly or Apple Tapioca Pudding

    =Third Day=

    Succotash
    Rice--Lentil Gravy
    Leavened and Unleavened Breads
    Steamed Apple Dumplings--Creamy Sauce

    =Fourth Day=

    Mother’s Soup--Cream Noodles
    Trumese in Tomato
    Celery, Radishes or Green Onions
    Squash Cutlets or Mashed Winter Squash
    Apple and Banana Salad--Cream Dressing

    =Fifth Day=

    Baked Beans and Brown Bread
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Pumpkin or Water Custard Pie
    Nuts and Raisins

    =Sixth Day=

    Cream of Corn Soup--Pop Corn
    Celery
    Gems and Oil, Cream or Butter
    Quaker Pudding--Molasses, Maple or other Sauce

    =Seventh Day=

    Baked Macaroni--Cream Sauce
    Green or Canned Peas
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Lettuce--Mayonnaise or Lemonade Dressing
    Fruit Bread or Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Cream Pie or Gelatine Blanc Mange


SUPPER

    =Number One=

    Stewed Fresh Tomatoes
    Bread and Butter
    White Crackers
    Fruit and Nut Relish

    =Number Two=

    Bread and Milk
    Baked Sweet Apples or Blueberries or Black Raspberries

    =Number Three=

    Nuts
    Crackers
    Apples or Other Fruit

    =Number Four=

    Rhode Island Johnny Cakes--Honey
    Cocoanut Crisps
    Tea-Hygiene

    =Number Five=

    Rice Cakes or Milk Toast
    Sliced or Stewed Peaches
    Old Friend Sponge Cake

    =Number Six=

    Baked Apples,
    Pears and Grapes, or Apples,
    Grapes and Figs,
    or Sour Apples and Sweet Apples

    =Number Seven=

    Rusk or Granella and Milk

    =Number Eight=

    Acushnet Hash
    Water Corn Bread
    Whole Wheat Wafers
    Cereal Coffee

    =Number Nine=

    Cream of Tomato Soup--Soup Crackers
    Bread and Butter
    Apple Sauce

    =Number Ten=

    Cream of Corn Toast
    Rolls
    Honey


MIDDAY LUNCHEON

    =Number One=

    Tomato Shortcake
    Crackers
    Pine Nut Cheese
    Lemon Egg Cream

    =Number Two=

    Hot Egg Sandwich
    Lettuce--French or Mayonnaise Dressing

    =Number Three=

    Timbales of Corn
    Whole Wheat Popovers
    Graham Crisps
    Cantaloupe

    =Number Four=

    Consomme--Sticks
    Celery Sandwiches
    Washington Pie

    =Number Five=

    Bread Omelet with Molasses Sauce
    Graham Wafers
    Tea-Hygiene

    =Number Six=

    Sunflower Mayonnaise
    Sticks
    Bread and Butter
    Apples, Peaches or Pears, or Canned Peaches or Pears

    =Number Seven=

    Apple Salad--Almond or Cream Dressing
    Whole Wheat Sticks (shortened)
    Bread and Butter
    Rich Small Cakes


PUBLIC OR ENTERTAINMENT DINNERS

    =Number One=

    Nut Bouillon
    Royal Paste
    Croutons
    Ripe Olives

    Trumese Pie
    Celery in Tomato
    Graham Crisps

    Apple and Pineapple Salad
    Cream Dressing
    White Sticks

    White Fruit Cake (no icing, almonds on top)
    Cereal Coffee

    =Number Two=

    Milk Stew of Oyster Plant
    Soup Crackers
    Celery

    Timbale of Trumese--Boundary Castle (fresh mushroom) Sauce
    Cauliflower--Sauce Americaine
    Beaten Biscuit

    Mint Grape Fruit Salad or Orange Mint Salad
    White Sticks

    Ice Cream (unflavored)
    Cocoanut Jumbles

    =Number Three=

    Oyster Plant or Asparagus _a la Creme_
    Rolled Bread and Butter Sandwiches
    Blanched Almonds, dried

    Trumese and Celery Salad on Swedish Milk Biscuit with lettuce leaf
    Whole Wheat Gems--Butter

    Cocoanut Cream Pie--Granella Crust
    Mince Pie--Pastry Crust

    =Number Four=

    Nut Chowder--Sticks

    Helianthus (Sunflower) Mayonnaise

    Cucumber or Celery or Onion Sandwiches

    Pineapple Gelatine--Whipped Cream
    Cocoanut Crisps

    Confection Potatoes
    Mixed Nuts

    =Number Five=

    Cream of Tomato or Spinach Broth
    Soup Sticks

    Trumese and Mushrooms _a la Creme_
    Wafers

    Scalloped Oyster Plant
    Celery
    English Bread and Butter

    Currant and Red Raspberry Salad
    Almonds or Walnuts

    Rice Charlotte--Whipped Cream Roses
    Small Cakes
    Cereal Coffee

    =Number Six=

    Cream of Fresh Mushroom Soup
    Finger Rolls (of roll or universal dough)

    Claudia’s Stuffed Egg Plant
    Whole Wheat Popovers

    Nut Croquettes
    Baked Creamed Tomato
    Crisp Bread

    Grape Fruit and Celery Salad (in grape fruit cups)
    Crackers with Nuts

    Rose Ice Cream
    Hard Sponge Cakes
    Celery Tea--Cream


SIMPLE COMPANY LUNCHEONS

    =Number One=

    Steamed Trumese Biscuit (p. 137)--Boundary Castle Sauce
    Jelly Sandwiches
    Celery
    Pineapple Sponge--Whipped Cream
    Cream Crisps

    =Number Two=

    Creamed Mushrooms (or oyster plant) in Ramekins or
    Cream Puff cases
    Sticks
    Orange and Celery Salad
    Wafers
    Cereal Coffee
    Nut Crisps


EVENING LUNCHEONS

    =Number One=

    Sweet Fruit Sandwiches
    Cereal Coffee

    =Number Two=

    Grapes
    Pears
    Orange, or Mint Orange Nectar

    =Number Three=

    Vanilla or Lemon Egg Cream
    Nut and Citron Cake
    Raspberry Lemonade (later)

    =Number Four=

    Ice Cream
    Crackers with Nuts
    Sweetmeats or Caramels
    Orangeade (later)

    =Number Five=

    Grape Sherbet
    Nut Crisps
    Royal Sponge Cake (with Royal filling and icing)


NON-STARCH MEALS

    =Number One=

    =Breakfast=

    Plain Omelet
    Apples
    Pears
    Grapes

    =Dinner=

    Nut and Tomato Bisque
    String Beans
    Lettuce--French or Lemonade Dressing
    Blanched Almonds
    Honey

    =Supper=

    Baked Apples
    Mellow Ripe Bananas
    Figs

    =Number Two=

    =Breakfast=

    Broiled Trumese
    Apples in Oil
    Apples
    Grapes

    =Dinner=

    Cottage Cheese--Chili Sauce or Mayonnaise
    Beet Greens
    Green Peas
    Baked Custard

    =Supper=

    Plums
    Pears
    Raisins

    =Number Three=

    =Breakfast=

    Scrambled Eggs
    Ripe Currants
    Canteloupe

    =Dinner=

    Baked Peanuts
    Pickled Carrots
    Stewed Oyster Plant
    Bananas

    =Supper=

    Apples
    Grapes or Tart Lemonade

    =Number Four=

    =Breakfast=

    Dried Blanched Almonds
    Apples
    Steamed Prunes

    =Dinner=

    Spinach with Egg--Mayonnaise Dressing
    My Mother’s Cabbage
    Nesselrode Confection or Sweetmeats, p. 489

    =Supper=

    Cereal Coffee--Cream
    Brazil Nuts
    Figs or Dates

    =Number Five=

    =Breakfast=

    Almond Puree
    Peaches
    Bananas

    =Dinner=

    Trumese and Celery Salad
    Stewed Okra
    Boiled Onions
    Fruit Gelatine

    =Supper=

    Figs and Milk

    =Number Six=

    =Breakfast=

    Nut Omelet
    Strawberries
    Bananas

    =Dinner=

    Trumese or Nutmese and Onion Sandwiches
    Celery in Tomato
    Stewed Asparagus
    Steamed Figs
    Pecans

    =Supper=

    Strawberries
    Oranges

These meals may be easily changed to sugarless as well as starchless by
substituting vegetables that contain no sugar for those that have some,
and tart fruits for sweet ones.

The custard may be made without sugar. Gluten biscuit used as meat with
fruit and vegetables give more of a variety, when obtainable.

One may take large quantities of fruit in place of starchy foods, since
they are not so concentrated.


PICNIC AND TRAVELLING LUNCHES

Collect boxes of different sizes as you have opportunity.

Save waxed paper from cracker boxes and other sources and have a
certain place for it so as to know just where to find it. Quite a large
roll can be bought in the stationery stores for five cents.

Keep small tin boxes for packing strong flavored sandwiches, and
vaseline bottles and cold cream jars for salad dressings, or for
sandwich fillings which must be spread upon the bread the last thing.

For a picnic or a long journey, be sure to take everything that may
be needed, corkscrew, can opener, nut picks, paring knives, spoons, a
case knife, a knife large enough and sharp enough to cut bread, cups
for drinking, and a small saucepan or large cup for heating drinks
or anything necessary. As far as possible, carry dishes that may be
thrown away, as wood or paper plates and cups. A spirit lamp is very
desirable.

Rich cakes, jellies and all sweets are especially objectionable for
travelling.

Be sure to take plenty of lemons and other fruits, as the trains will
not often stop long enough for one to buy them at the stations, and
they may not be at the proper stage of ripeness and the price will be
high.

Carry salt in a vaseline bottle, or if in a salt shake, screw a
piece of thick paper under the top and wrap well. Have sugar in a
wide-mouthed bottle or jar, also ripe olives. Rice or custard puddings
can be carried in cups.

Bottled fruit juices are invaluable. Lemon juice sufficient for one day
may be bottled.

A jar of cold cereal coffee or of tea-hygiene with cream would be
highly prized by many.

Trumese in Tomato or Sauce Imperial, well dried in the oven, is
excellent. Fruit buns retain their moisture nicely.

Wrap sandwiches, buns, cakes, eggs and nut foods in waxed paper, and if
there are different kinds of sandwiches mark them.

For a simple luncheon without a knife or spoon, pare oranges and break
them into sections, and pare, quarter and core apples, and wrap all in
waxed paper. These fruits with a trumese and egg sandwich (p. 472) make
an ideal midday luncheon when spending the day in the city on business.

One lady who has travelled a great deal tells me that she has found
a small white apron with a pocket a great convenience in serving and
eating lunches on trains, and a gentleman suggests that a short apron
with a bib and strap and a pocket for the napkin would be a great
convenience for those of his sex.

Some of the strong pasteboard boxes that package foods come in, make
good lunch boxes. We have one about 22 in. long, 9 in. wide and 6 in.
deep that we can carry in a shawl strap, which we prize.

The dining car has no attractions compared with the comforts of a nice
home luncheon for travelling.




INDEX


  =Breads, Leavened=, 424
    Beadles, 443
    Biscuit, Breakfast, 442
      Potato, 441
      Raised, 441
      Split, 441
    Boston Brown, 434
    Buns, Currant, 443
      Lemon, 443
      Nut, 443
      Plain, 442
    Cakes, Buckwheat, Bread Crumbs, 444
        Old Time, 444
      Crumb, 444
    Corn Cake, 435
    Corn Meal, Scalded, 434
    Crackers, Soup, 438
    Crisp, 433
    Crust, Sour Cream, 437
      Universal, 437
    Delicious, 433
    Flour, 426
    Fruit, 431
    Graham, 431
    Irish, 431
    New York “Home Made,” 432
    Nut, 431
    Oatmeal, 432
    Potato Ball, 433
    Rice, 432
    Rolls, 438
      Buttermilk, 440
      Crumb, 440
        Of Brown Bread, 440
      Rolled, 441
      Swiss, 440
    Rusk, 442
      Browned, 442
    Rye, 432
    Salt Rising, 435, 436
    Sally Lunn, 438
    Sticks, 443
    White, 430
    Whole Wheat, 431
    Yeast, 424
      Bread, Suggestions, 427
      Dry, 426
      Potato, Grated, 425
        Mashed, 425
    Zwieback, 432
  =Breads, Unleavened=, without chemicals, 445
    Bannock, 451
    Bars, Fruit, 462
    Biscuit, Beaten, 460
        Maryland, 460
      Maryland, Unbeaten, 461
      Swedish Milk, 461
      Brown, Crumb, 451
        The Laurel, 450
      Cake, Ash, 453
        Hoe, 453
        Johnny, 451
        Oat, 452
        Rice, 450
    Cakes, Batter, Green Corn, 457
      Griddle, 455
        Buckwheat, 455
        Corn Meal, no flour, 457
        Corn and Crumb, 456
        Crumb, 455
          No Flour, 456
        Hominy, 457
        Mushroom, 455
        Nut Butter, 457
        Plain, 455
          with Roux, 456
            Variations, 456
        Rice, 455
          No Flour, 456
        Savory Meat, 455
      Nut and Egg, 457
      Oat, 463
      Rhode Island Johnny, 452
      Southern Johnny, 451
    Corn, 450
      Water, 451
    Crackers, Graham, Sweet, 462
      with Nuts, 462
      Sour Cream, 462
      White, 461
    Crisps, Cocoanut, 464
      Cream, 463
      Graham, 463
      Nut, 463
    Crumbs and Corn, 450
    Crusts, Corn Meal, 452
        White, 452
    Dodgers, Corn Meal Porridge, 454
      Sister Welch’s, 454
        Granular Meal, 454
    Dough, 457
    Gems, 446
      Corn and Graham, 448
        Meal and White Flour, 448
      Cream Corn, 448
      Crumb, 448
      Fruit and Nut, 447
      Graham, 447
      Rye, 448
        and Wheat, 448
      Sally Lunn, 447
      White, 447
      Whole Wheat, 447
    Pone or Corn Bread
      “Straight,” 453
    Popovers, 448
      Corn, 449
      Other Variations, 449
      Whole Wheat, 449
    Potato, Sweet, 449
    Rolls, Cream, 458
      Fruit, 459
        and Nut, 459
      Graham, Plain, 458
      Nut, 458
      Shortened, 459
    Sticks, 459
      Porridge, 460
      White, 459
    Straws, Nut, 464
    Unleavened, for Communion, 464
    Wafers, Cocoanut, 461
      Fruit, 463
      Nut, 463
  =Cakes=, 370
    Additions to Cookies and Small Cakes, 387
    Angel, 385
    Anise Wafers, 389
    Citron and Cocoanut, 380
    Cocoanut Loaf or Layer, 374
    Corn Starch, 375
    Cookies, Cream, 388
      Molasses, 390
      Sour Cream, 389
    Cream Puffs, 386
    Crullers, 392
    Doughnuts, Risen, 392
      Baked, 391
    Dried Apple, 380
    Elizabeth’s Raised, 381
    Fried, 393
    Fruit and Nut, 375
    Fruit, White, 389
    German Almond Loaf, 382
      Coffee, 383
      Light, 377
    Julia’s Birthday, 374
    Jumbles, Yolk, 388
    Lunch, 389
    Maple Loaf, 382
    Molasses, 378
      Bread or Hard Molasses Cake, 378
      No eggs, 390
      Raised, 383
      Sugar, 378
    Nut, 391
    Nut and Citron, 373
    Patty, 374
    Pie, Washington, 381
    Plain Loaf, 378
    Rice Flour, 375
    Rich Loaf, 374
    Saffron, 379
    Scotch Short Bread, 377
    Silver, 377
    Snaps, Molasses, 390
    Sponge, Cocoanut, 384
      Layer, 384
      Old Friend, 384
      Rice Flour, 385
      Royal, 383
        Variations of, 383
    Suggestions, 370
    Suggestive Combinations, 387
    Tri-Colored Layer, 385
    Wafers, Honey, 389
      Nut, 391
    Washington, 381
    Without Chemicals, 382
    Yeast, 379
  =Cakes, Icings and Fillings for=, 393
    Apple, Creamed, 398
    Cream, Cocoanut, 397
      Whipped, 397
    Filling, Butternut, 397
      Cocoanut, 398
      Cream, 400
      Date, 398
      Fig Jelly, 399
      Imperial, 399
      Lemon Cheese, 401
      For Lemon Pie Cake and Washington Pie, 400
      Marshmallow, 401
      Nut and Raisin, 399
      Pineapple, 399
      Prune, 399
      Royal, 400
      Sour Cream, 398
    Frosting, Butter, 395
    Icing, Boiled, 396
        Maple, 397
        Milk, 396
      Caramel, 397
      Coffee, 399
      Cream, 394
      Fruit Juice, 394
      Golden, 395
      Jelly, 395
      Pineapple, 399
      Royal, 400
      Water, 394
      White of Egg, 395
        With Lemon Juice, 395
  =Cereals=, 409
    Corn, Pop, 411
      Sweet, Parched, 410
      To Hull, 417
    Granella, No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 418
      To Serve, 417
    Hominy, Baked, 417
    Porridges, 412
    Proportion of Water and Length of Time for Cooking, 413
    Rice, 414
      Baked, 416
      To Boil, 415
      Chinese Way, 415
      Indian Way, 416
      Parched, 416
      To Steam, 416
    Rusk, 412
    Yolk--Egg, 411
  =Chestnuts=, 271
    To Blanch, 271
    Boiled, 271
    Puree, 271
    Puree with Whipped Cream, 272
    Roasted, 271
    Salad, Chestnut and Banana, 272
    to Shell, 271
    Vanilla or Raisin, 272
  =Confections=, 488
    Candy, Cocoanut, 490
      Hoarhound, 492
      Maple Cream, 492
      Molasses, 491
      Puffs, 490
    Cream, Confection, 490
    Creams, Nut, 490
    Dates, Cream Stuffed, 488
      Stuffed, 488
    Figs, Stuffed, 488
    Kisses, 489
    Lozenges, 492
    Marshmallows, 490
    Penosia, 492
    Potatoes, Confection, 490
    Prunes, Stuffed, 489
    Sweetmeat, Fruits, 489
    Sweetmeats, Fruits and Nuts, 489
    Taffy, Everton, 491
      Lemon, 491
  =Drinks=, 479
    Coffees, Cereal, 483
        Cold, 485
      Cream for, 485
    Cereal, to make, 484
    Eggnog, 485
      Hot, 485
    Juice, Cranberry, 483
    Juices, Fruit, to Prepare, 483
    Lemonades, 482
      Egg, 482
      Milk and Egg, 482
      Mint, 482
      White of Egg, 482
    Nectar, Banana Lemon, 481
      Mint Orange, 482
      Orange, 482
        Banana, 482
    Nectars, Fruit, 481
    Orangeade, Egg, 482
    Tea, Bran, 485
      Hygiene, 484
    Water, Distilled, 480
      Hard, 481
      Mineral, 480
  =Entrées and Breakfast, Luncheon and Supper Dishes=, 109
    _a la creme_, Asparagus Tips, 116
      Beans, Young Lima, 116
      Celery and Mushrooms, 115
      Macaroni and Mushrooms, 116
      Oyster Plant and Mushrooms, 116
    Cakes, Corn, 114
      Oyster Plant Griddle, 114
      Spanish, 136
    Croquettes, 109
      Bread, 111
      Celery, 110
      Corn, 110
      Rice, 110
        and Fig, 111
      Sauce, 109
    Custards, Celery, 115
      Corn, 114
      Onion, 115
    Cutlets of Corn Meal Porridge, 113
      Cucumber, 113
      Rice, 113
      Squash, 112
      Vegetable, 112
    Hash, Acushnet, 132
      Cabbage and Potato, 133
      With Poached Egg, 133
      Savory, 133
    Hashes, Vegetable, 132
    Miscellaneous
      Apples in Oil, 138
        Onion, 138
      Asparagus en Croustade, 112
      Baked Creamed Tomatoes, 122
        Potatoes and Milk, 138
        Peeled Tomatoes, 130
        Sliced Tomatoes, 130
        Squash with Celery Stuffing, 127
      Biscuit, Mamie’s Surprise, 136
      Bread and Milk with Sweet Fruits, 138
      Broiled or Baked Tomatoes, 130
      Creamed Sweet Potatoes, 122
      Corn Oysters, 114
      Dried and Hulled Corn, 132
      Fruit and Nut Tomatoes, 129
      Macaroni with Onion or Celery and Tomato, 131
      Mashed Potato Loaf, 123
      Oyster Plant en Croustade, 112
        Patties, 111
        and Potato Omelet, 138
      Parsnip and Potato Stew, 131
      Pilau, stewed rice, 131
      Rice Border, 137
      Souffles, Individual Daisy, 123
      Spinach, 122
      Succotash, 131
      Tomato Short Cake, 131
      Yorkshire Pudding, 137
    Pie, Carrot, 126
      Mushroom and Celery, 125
      Oyster Plant, 125
      Oyster Plant Pastry, 125
      Potato, 126
      Vegetable, 124
    Pudding, Carrot, 118
      Corn, Green, 116
      Corn, no eggs, 117
      Corn, no milk, 116
      Oyster Plant, 117
      Squash, 117
      Sweet Potato, 117
    Scallop of Egg Plant, Armenian, 119
      Of Oyster Plant, 121
      Oyster Plant, 121
    Scalloped Asparagus, 118
      Cabbage, 118
      Celery and Tomato, 122
      Egg Plant, 118
      Onions, 119
      Oyster Plant, 120
      Cooked Potatoes, 120
      Potatoes, raw nut butter and onions, 119
      Raw Potatoes, 119
      Squash, 120
      Sweet Potatoes, 120
      Tomatoes, 122
        Onion Flavor, 121
        With Rice and Onion, 122
    Stuffed Egg Plant, Claudia’s, 128
      Potatoes, 128
      Potatoes, Meringued, 128
      Squash, Winter, 126
      Tomatoes, 128
        Fillings for, 129
      Tomatoes, Green, 130
    Timbale of Carrot, 123
      Corn and Egg, 124
      Of Corn, Individual, 124
    Toasts, 133
      Blueberry, 134
      Cream, 135
      Creamed, 135
      Cream of Corn, 135
      French, 136
      German, 136
      Lentil and Other Legume, 135
      Milk, Old-Fashioned, 135
      Prune, 134
      Royal, 135
      Sister Betty Saxby’s, 134
    Zwieback, 133
  =Fruits=, 34
    Cooked, 47
      Apple Sauce, 47
        Strained, 47
        Baked, 47
      Apples, Quarters of, Baked, 47
        Baked, 48
        Lemon, Orange and Others, 48
        Sweet, Baked, 48
        Mother Cranson’s Stewed, Sweet, 48
      Bananas, Stewed, 49
        in Butter, 49
        and Raisins, 49
        Baked, 49
          Crumbed, 49
          With Tomatoes, 49
      Cranberries, 49
        Stewed, 50
        Baked, 50
        With Raisins, 50
      Peaches, Baked, 50
      Quinces, Baked, 50
        Plain Baked, 50
      Rhubarb, 50
        Stewed, 51
        Baked, 51
    Dried
      Apricots, Stewed, 52
      Butter, 52
      Figs, Steamed, 52
        Stewed, 52
      Prune Marmalade, 52
      Prunes, Steamed, 52
      Sweet California, 52
      Stewed, 51
    Fresh, 34
      Apples, 36
      Bananas, 37
      Blackberries, 37
      Canteloupe, 37
      Currants, 38
      Currants, Frosted, 38
      Dates and Cream, 38
      Dates or Figs and Milk, 38
      Dates and Nuts, 38
      Figs, 38
      Gooseberries, 39
      Grape Fruit, 39
        Ambrosia, 40
        With Malaga Grapes, 40
      Grapes, 49
        To Pack, 39
      Olives, 40
      Oranges, 41
      Peaches, 42
      Peaches and Cream, 43
      Peach Snow, 43
      Pineapples, 43
        Grape Fruit, 44
        and Orange Ambrosia, 45
        Shredded, 44
        and Strawberry Ambrosia, 45
        and Whipped Cream, 44
      Raisins, 45
      Raspberries, Black, 45
        Red, 45
      Strawberries, 45
        Orange, 46
      Watermelon, 46
      Whortleberries, 46
    Jam, Gooseberry, 67
      Raspberry and Currant, 66
      Rhubarb, Mrs. Chandler’s, 67
      Rhubarb and Pineapple, 76
      Strawberry, 66
    Jellies, 62
      Apple, 64
        and Cranberry, 64
        Parings and Cores, 64
      Blueberry, 66
      Cranberry, 65
        Pulp, 66
        Sauce, 66
      Currant, 63
        Black, 64
      Currant and Raspberry, 64
      Elder-berry and Apple, 65
      Gooseberry, Green, 65
      Grape, 66
      Quince, 65
      Tumblers, to Make, 63
    Miscellaneous
      Butter, Elder-berry and Apple, 67
        Melrose Apple, 67
      Grape Marmalade, 68
      Lemon Peaches, 68
      Ripe Cucumber Pickles, 68
      To Dry Blueberries, 68
    To Can, 53
      Apples, 61
        Baked, 61
        Sweet, and Cranberries, 57
          Quinces, 56
      Barberries, 59
      Berries, Solid, 55
      Citron, 58
      Combinations of Fruits, 61
      Cranberries and Sweet Apples, 57
      Grapes, Concord, 59
        Juice, 60
      Juices, Fruit, 60
        Condensed, 61
        To Bottle, 61
      Peaches, 55
      Pears, 56
      Pineapple, 58
      Plums, 56
      Quinces and Sweet Apples, 56
      Rhubarb, Cooked, 58
        Without Cooking, 58
      Strawberries, Red Raspberries and all delicate berries, 57
      Tomatoes, 59
        for Soups and Sauces, 60
        Whole, 60
      Watermelon Rind, 58
  =Gelatine, Vegetable=, 335
    Agar Agar, Medical Use of, 346
    Aspic for Garnishing, 345
      Light, 344
      Tomato, 344
    Bavarian, Coffee, 342
      and Blanc Mange or Jellied Custard, 342
    Beets in Jelly, 337
    Blanc Mange, 341
      Cocoanut, 341
    Bouillon for Jelly, 345
    Broth, Dark, Jellied, 346
    _Cafe au Lait_, Jellied, 342
    Charlotte, Rice, 341
    Cream, Maple, 342
      Orange, 339
    Custard, Jellied, 342
      With Meringue, 343
    Directions, 335
    Jelly, Cream of Tomato and Carrot, 343
      Fruit, 336
        and Mint, 337
    Jellied Cream Trumese, 346
    Jelly, Lemon, Delicate, 337
      Orange, 338
        Or Lemon with Strawberries, 338
      In Orange Cups, 338
      Red, with Fruit, 338
      Tomato, 344
      Whipped Cream, 342
    Lemon Snow, 340
    Molds, Apple Sauce, 339
      Prune Cream, 340
    Orange Garnish for Salad or Cold Entree, 339
    Pudding, Marshmallow, 343
      Sponge, 340
    Salad, Wedding Breakfast, 338
    Secrets of Success, 335
    Sponge, Pineapple, 340
    Stock for Jelly, Dark, 345
      Light, 345
    Of Trumese, 346
  =General=, 9
    Cooking Utensils, Their Uses and Care, 9
    Colorings, 32
      Carmine, Pokeberry, 32
      Green, 32
      Red, 32
      Yellow, 32
    Economy, 15
    Flavorings, 24
      Brown Onion, 27
      Salad, 28
      For Sweets, 27
    Garnishing, 29
      Arrangement and Garnishing of Salads, 33
      Egg Daisies, 31
      Oxeye Daisies, 31
      Pastry Bag, 32
      Potato Balls, 31
      Radish Lilies, 30
  =Ice Cream and Fruit Ices=, 402
    Frappes, 408
    Frozen Peaches, 408
      Pineapple, 407
      Strawberries, 408
    Ice, Currant and Raspberry, 406
      Lemon, 405
      Mint, 406
      Orange, 406
      Raspberry, 406
    Ice Cream, The Laurel, 404
      Maple, 404
    Sherbet, Grape, 406
      Lemon, 407
      Mint, 407
      Orange, 407
      Pineapple, 407
  =Invalid Foods=, 486
    Broth, Parched Corn, 487
    Egg, White of, 487
    Gruel, Almond, 487
      Egg, 487
      Granella Malted Milk, 487
      Raisin, 487
    Suggestions, 486
  =Macaroni=, 419
    Baked, in Cream Sauce, 421
    Browned, and Granella, 422
    To Cook, 419
    With Corn, 421
    Cream Mold of, 422
      Sour, 423
    In Milk, 422
    With Pine Nuts, 421
    With Tomato and Onion, 422
    Vermicelli with Asparagus, 422
  =Meals and Menus=, 493
    Breakfast, 495
    Dinner, 496
    Luncheons, Evening, 501
      Midday, 498
      Simple Company, 501
    Menus, 495
    Non-Starch Meals, 502
    Public or Entertainment Dinners, 499
    Supper, 497
  =Meats, True=, 139
    =Eggs=, 195
      _a la Salade_, 201
      Boiled, Hard, 200
      Caramel, 215
      Carbonated, 215
      Cream, Almond, 214
        Banana, 214
        Honey, 214
        Lemon, 213
        Maple, 214
        Raspberry, 214
        Vanilla, 214
      Creamed, 199
        On Toast, 200
      Croquettes, Egg, 203
        Egg and Rice, 203
      In Perfection, 212
      In the Shell, 197
      Italian, 200
      and Macaroni, 200
      and Milk, 215
        Hot, 215
      With Olives, Ripe, 201
      Omelets, 203
        Almond Butter, 209
        Baked, 209
        Bread, 209
        Bread and Milk, 209
        Breaded Tomato, 210
        Bread Omelet Pie, 210
        Butter, Nut, Unroasted, 209
        Corn Starch, 210
        Cracker, 210
        Crumb German, 210
        Foam, 208
        French, Plain, 204
        Grape, 208
      Okra in Almond Cream Sauce, 207
      Orange and Another, 208
        Puff, 207
        Savory, 208
        Souffle, 211
      Trumese Salad Entree, 207
        Variations, 205
        Vegetable Pudding, 207
        White Sauce, 210
        Pickled, 201
      Poached, 198
        Beaten, 199
        Creamed Celery, 199
        Rice, 199
        Yolks, 199
        Whites, 199
      Roasted, 198
      Scalloped Eggs and Celery, 212
        Eggs and Potatoes, 212
      Scrambled, 202
        Cream Sauce, 203
        Florentine, 203
        Large Quantity, 202
        Sour Milk, 202
        Tomato, 202
      Scrambles, Various, 202
      Shirred, 201
      Stuffed, 200
      Suggestions, 196
      Timbales, 211
        Rice and Egg, 212
      Uncooked Egg Dishes, 213
      With Sauce, 200
    =Legumes=, 184
      =Beans=, Baked, Rich, 190
          Western, 192
        Creamed, 188
        Croquettes, 188
        Flowering, 193
        Loaf, Sister Boulter’s
          Red Kidney, 190
        Mashed, 186
        Stewed, 193
          In Bean Sauce, 193
      Hash, 195
      =Lentils=, Baked, 193
        Cabbage Leaf Rolls of, 194
        Croquettes, 188
        Mashed, 185
          With Rice, 186
        Pie, Potato Crust, 187
          Universal Crust, 187
        With Poached Eggs, 188
        Roast, 189
        Stewed, 194
        Timbales, Rice and, 189
      Patties, 189
      =Peas=, Baked, Split Green, 192
          Yellow, 192
        Croquettes, 188
        Mashed, 186
        With Macaroni or Vermicelli, 187
        Pie, Corn Crust, 187
        Ragout of Chick, 194
        Roast, 190
          Chick, 190
        Stewed, Split Green, 193
          Timbales, 189
        Purees of, 190
        Variegated Meat, 186
    =Nuts=, 140
      A Few Suggestive Combinations, 142
      Almonds, 140
        Toasted, 147
        To Blanch, 141
      Brazil Nuts, 141
      Butter, 143
        for Bread, 145
        Cocoanut, 146
      Butternuts, 141
      Cocoanut, Ground or Grated, 146
        Milk, 145
        Shredded, 146
      Cooked Nut Dishes, 147
        Cheese, Almond, 153
          Peanut, 153
          Pine Nut, 153
          Pine Nut and Banana, 153
        Chowder, Peanut German, 151
        Confection, Almond, 153
          Nesselrode, 154
        Croquettes, 147
          Peanut and Rice, 152
        Savory Nut, 147
      Cutlets, Nut and Sweet Potato, 148
      Fruit and Nut Relish, 153
      Gumbo, Peanut, 150
      Hashes, Peanut, 151
      Loaf of Nuts, 149
      Mound, Black Walnut and Potato, 148
      Peanuts, Baked, Lemon Apples, 150
        Baked like Beans, 150
        With Green Peas, 150
        Hot Pot of, 151
        To Boil, 149
        With Noodles or Vermicelli, 150
      Pie, Peanut, 152
        With Turnip Crust, 152
      Pine Nuts, Baked, 148
      Roast or Timbale, Nut and Rice, 148
      Scallops, 153
      Soup Stock, 149
      Stew, Nut Chinese, 150
      Cream and Milk, 145
        Rich, of Raw Peanuts, 146
      Filberts, 141
      Meal, Nut, 144
      Peanuts, 142
      Pine Nuts, 142
      Relish, Nut, 146
      Walnuts, Black, 141
        English, 141
      =Nutmese=, 174
        Cornstarch, 175
        Tomato, 175
      Nutmese Dishes, 175
        Nutmese _a la creme_, 177
          With Baked Beans, 176
          Broiled, 176
          and Corn, 178
          Cottage Cheese, 175
          In Cream of Tomato Sauce, 177
          Croquettes, 179
          Crust, Hashed Potato, 179
          Cutlets, 176
          and Green Peas with New Potatoes, 177
          Patties, 179
        Pie, Apple and Nutmese, 179
          Nutmese and Potato with Pastry Crust, 179
          With Potato Crust, 178
        and Rice with Peas Sauce, 176
        Scallop of Nutmese and Tomato, 178
        Shells, Nutmese and Oyster Plant in, 178
        Stew, Nut Irish, 176
        Tomato Nutmese and Eggs, 176
      =Trumese=, 154, 156, 158
        Almond, 158
        Brazil Nut, 159
        Cashew Nut, 159
        English Walnut, 158
        Pine Nut, 158
        Red Kidney Bean, 158
      Trumese Dishes, 159
        _a la creme_, Trumese and Celery, 166
          Trumese and Macaroni, 166
          Trumese and Mushrooms, 165
          Trumese and Oyster Plant, 166
        _a la mode_, 160
        Baked, with Onion Dressing, 162
        Boiled Dinner, 169
        Broiled, 159
        Cannelon of, 171
        en Casserole, 166
        Croquettes, 172, 173
          Russian, 174
          Savory Trumese and Rice, 173
        Cutlets, 162
          Batter, 163, 164
          Corn, Green, 164
          Imperial, 163
          Lemon Rings with Parsley Butter for, 163
          Savory with Mashed Potato, 163
        And Eggs, 160
        With Egg, Poached, 160
        Elsa’s Roll of, 171
        Hash, Trumese and Potato, 174
          Trumese and Rice, 174
        and Italian Sauce on Biscuit or Dumplings, 160
        With Jelly Sauce, 160
        For Luncheon or Second Course, 165
        With Mushrooms, 160
        With Onions, 162
        Pasties, 171
        Pie, 167
          Crusts, All Ready, 168
          Pot, 168
          Rice and Trumese, 167
        Ragout (Stew) of Trumese, 164
        Rissoles, 171
        Salad Entree, 159
        Scallop with Cracker Crumbs, 168
        Shortcake, Italian Sauce, 168
        Smothered with Bananas, 162
        Souffle, 172
        Spanish, 162
        Stewed Hashed, 164
        Timbale, Boundary Castle Sauce, 170
        Rice, Trumese and Asparagus Tips, 171
          Trumese Stuffing, 169
        Trumese and Rice, 170
        In Tomato, 161
        With Truffles and Mushrooms, 165
      Trumese and Nutmese Dishes, 179
        Fricassee, Nut, 179
          Nut with Rigatoni, 179
        Pie, Nut Pastry, 180
        Pudding, Nut Corn, 180
        Timbales, Cream of Trumese and Nutmese, 180
      =Roasts=, 181
        Black Walnut, 183
        Brazil Nut and Lentil, 183
          Cutlets of Roast, 182
  =Gravies and Sauces=, 223
    Almond and Tomato Cream, 225
    Apple and Onion, 233
    Boundary Castle, 231
    Bread, 228
      and Bean, 228
    For Breaded Carrots, 236
    Brown, Simple, 224
      Onion, 224
      Dried Mushroom, 232
    Canned Mushroom, 232
    Catsup, Tomato, 233
    Catsups, Other, 233
    Celery Consomme, 225
    Chili, 233
    Chutney, Apple and Green Tomato, 235
      Bro. Coates’ Mother’s, 235
      Jellied, 234
      Ripe Cucumber, 234
      Tomato, 234
    Consomme, 225
    Cream or White, 226
      Of Fresh Mushroom, 231
        Lentil, 229
        Tomato, 226
          Sister Howard’s, 226
      Tomato Cream, 226
      Variations, 227, 228
    Currant, 234
    Drawn Butter, 228
        Sauce, 229
      Variations, 228, 229
    Emerald, Parsley, 229
    Everybody’s Favorite, 225
    Gooseberry, Baked, 234
    Gravy for Rhode Island Johnny Cakes, 229
    Italian, Dried Mushroom, 232
    Lemon Butter, 236
    For Meat and Vegetable Pies, 229
    Mint, 235
      Currant, 235
    Mushroom and Asparagus, 231
    Nut Gravy for Roasts, 224
    Nut and Lentil, 230
      Onion, 224
      Plain, 224
      and Tomato, 224
      and Tomato Bisque, 224
    Old-Fashioned Milk Gravy, 225
    Olive, 230
      and Nut Butter, 231
    Peas and Carrot, 233
    Pink, 233
    Pickle for Beets, String Beans and Carrots, 236
    Roast Gravy, par excellence, 225
    Sauce Americaine, 236
      Imperial, 232
    Savory, 224
    Sour, for Carrot Timbale, 236
    Sour Cream, 226
    Suggestions, 223
    Swiss Lentil, 230
    Tarragon, 229
    Vegetable, 230
  =Milk, Cream, Butter and Cheese=, 473
    Butter, Sterilized, 474
      To Sterilize, 474
    Cheese, 477
      Cottage, 478
    Cream, Devonshire, 477
      Sour, Uses of Without Soda, 477
    Milk, To Pasteurize, 473
    Zeiger Case, 478
  =Mushrooms=, 216
    _a la Creme_, 219
    Baked, 217
    Broiled, 217
    Creamed, 217
    Chop Seuey, 218
    Dried, 218
    Fresh, Under Glass Globe, 219
    Pickled, 218
    Pie, Mushroom and Oyster Plant, 219
    Puff Balls, 218
    In Rice Rings, 218
    Soup, Boundary Castle, 220
      Cream of Fresh Mushroom, 220
    Steamed, 217
    Stew, 218
    Stewed, 217
    Stewed, Canned, 218
    Timbales, 219
  =Picnic and Travelling Lunches=, 504
  =Pies=, 347
    Apple, 353
      Dutch, 354
      and Elder-berry, 354
    Blueberry, 354
    Buttermilk, 365
    Carrot, 369
    Cherry, Mock, 355
    Cranberry, 355
      and Raisin, 355
      Stewed, 355
    Cream, Caramel, 362
      Cocoanut, 361
      Farina, 362
      My Mother’s, 363
      Nut, 362
      Parched Corn, 363
      Par Excellence, 361
      Of Rice, 362
      Sour, 363
      Tomato, 362
      White, 363
    Crumb, 364
    Crust, Bread, 351
      Butter, 351
      Or, Pastry, Cream, 351
      Granella, 352 and 353
      Hot Water, 351
      Nut Meal, 351
    Currant, 355
    Currant, Black, 355
      and Raisin, 355
        Raspberry, 355
    Custard, 364
      That Makes Its Own Crust, 364
      Without Milk, 364
    Elder-berry, 355
    Fig, 355
    Fillings for Granella Pies, 353
    Flakes, 350
    Gooseberry, Green, 355
    Lemon, 358
      With Bread, 360
      Cake or Sponge, 359
      Cornstarch, 360
      Cream, 359
      Custard, 361
      Without Eggs or Milk, 360
      Granella Crust, 358
      Mrs. Hance’s, 360
      That will Keep, 360
      Ma’s, 359
      Starchless, 359
    Mince, Crumb, 356
      Filling, 356
      Green Tomato, 356
      Sour Cream, Annie Carter, 356
    Orange, 361
      Custard, 361
    Pastry for One Large, 350
    Peach, 357
    Prune (two), 357
    Pumpkin, 366
      Grated, 368
      One, 368
      With Eggs, 368
      Without Eggs, 367
    Raisin, 357
      Lemon, 357
      Meringue, 357
    Rhubarb, 358
      Canned, 358
      Elizabeth’s, 358
      and Pineapple, 358
    Rhubarb and Strawberry, 358
    Rice, 364
    Sour Milk, Mock Lemon, 365
      With Raisins, 365
    Squash, Lemon, 366
        and Sweet Potato, 366
      Two Large, 366
    Strawberry Meringue, 358
    Suggestions, 347
    Sweet Potato, 365
    Tomato, Green, 358
    Turnip, 369
  =Puddings and Desserts With Eggs=, 309
    Apple Cream, 316
        Rose, 316
      Dessert, 323
    Apples, Molded, 322
    Banana, 314
    Batter, 321
    Birds Nest, 316
    Blanc Mange, Flour, 318
      Snow, No Milk, 318
    Brown Bread, 309
    Cabinet, Steamed, 310
    Cocoanut Banana, 312
      Rice, 321
    Corn Cake, 309
      Starch Meringue, 319
    Cottage, Eggs, 320
      Cheese and Cake, 322
    Cream, Sponge, 317
      Tapioca, Eva’s, 319
        In Glasses, 319
    Crumb, Steamed, 310
    Custard Apple, 313
      Boiled or Baked, Plain, 311
      Cocoanut Banana, 312
      Coffee, 312
      Corn Starch, 312
      Lemon Water, 312
      White, 311
      Of Yolks of Eggs, 311
    Dainty Dessert, 322
    Floating Island, 312, 313
    Fluff, Bro. Fulton’s Strawberry, 315
    Fruit, Steamed, 321
    Hattie’s Prune Dessert, 314
    Indian, Elizabeth’s, 309
    Lemon Snow, 316
      Souffle, 317
    Molasses Cake with Whipped Cream, 322
    Mold, Fruit Juice, 317
      Sweet Potato, 322
    Orange, 313
    Quaker, 321
    Rice Custard, 322
      Flour, 318
      With Lemon Meringue, 322
    Sea Foam, Sea Moss, 319
    Souffle, Prune, 314
    Sponge Apple, 317
    Tapioca, Molded, 320
      Water, 320
    Victoria Dessert, 310
    Whips, Fruit, 314
      Jelly, 315
      Strawberries and Cream, 316
  =Puddings and Desserts without Eggs=, 294
    Almond Custard, 307
    Apple, Mary’s Scalloped, 300
      Steamed, with Cream, 308
    Blanc Mange, 306
      Irish or Sea Moss, 308
      Rice Flour, 306
    Blueberry or Other Fruit, Steamed, 298
    Bread and Currant, 300
      and Milk, 300
    Cake, Dutch Apple, 296
    Clabber, 308
    Cobbler, Mother’s Peach, 299
      Pear, 299
    Corn, Green, 308
    Cottage, 299
    Cream, Farina Banana, 307
       Imperial Raspberry, 307
      Sago, 304
      Tapioca, Sister Bramhall’s, 303
    Dumplings, Apple, Baked, 294
        Steamed, 294
      Peach, 295
    Dutch Boiled or Steamed, 299
    Fig, Steamed, 301
    Graham Porridge, 306
    Indian, Emeline’s, 305
      Mrs. Hinsdale’s, 306
    Jelly, Caramel, 307
      Raspberry, 307
    Plum, 301
      American, 301
      Of Crumbs, 301
    Pot Pie, Blueberry, 295
    Rice, Cocoanut, 305
      Cream of, 304
      “Indian”, 305
      Nut Cream of, 305
      With Raisins, 305
    Roly-Poly, Orange, 295
    Scallop, Apple, 300
    Scalloped Raspberries, Blueberries or Peaches, 300
    Short Cakes, 296
      Fillings, 297
    Steamed, Plain, 299
    Tapioca, Granular, 302
      Apple, Pearl or Flake, 303
    Tarts or Dumplings, Fruit, 295
    Whole Wheat, Steamed, 302
  =Sauces, Pudding=, 324
    Almond Cream, 332
        For Puddings or Cereals, 332
      Whipped Cream, 332
    Antique, 331
    Banana Cream, 330
    Cocoanut, 330
    Cold Cream, 330
    Cranberry, 329
    Cream, 330
    Cream Lemon, 327
    Creamy, 324
      Of Cooking Oil, 331
    Custard, 332
    Date, 328
    Egg Cream, 331
    Fig, 328
    Foamy, 325
      White, 330
    Fruit Sabayon, 329
    Grape and Almond, 332
    Hard, 325
      Of Cooking Oil, 326
      Variations of, 325
      Variegated, 326
    Jelly Meringue, 329
    Lemon Cream, 331
      With Egg, 327
      Plain, 327
      Raisin, 328
      Starchless, 327
    Maple Sugar, 333
      Syrup, 333
    Molasses, 333
    Orange, 327
      Egg Cream, 331
      Syrup, 338
    Peach, 329
    Pineapple, 329
    Plain, 333
    Prune, 328
    Raisin, 328
    Raspberry, 324
    Red, 334
    Rose, 333
    Strawberry, 332
      Cream, 331
    Whipped Cream, 330
    White, 330
  =Salads=, 273
    Dressings, Cooked, 276
      Almond Butter, 278
      Boiled, with Cornstarch, 279
         Large Quantity, 277
      Butter, 277
      Cream, Sour, 277
        Sweet, 277
      Mayonnaise, Improved, 276
      Milk, Sweet or Sour, 277
      No Oil, 277
      Nut, no eggs, 278
      Olive, 279
      Orange, 279
      Rhubarb, 278
      Tomato, 279
    Dressings, Uncooked, 280
      Cream, Mayonnaise, 283
        Quick, Sweet, 282
        Sour, 282
          Sweet of, 282
        Whipped, 282
      English, 281
      French, 280
        Grape, 280
        Honey, 280
        Orange, 280
        Nut, 280
      Lemonade, 281
      Mayonnaise, 282
        Cream, 283
        Green, 283
      Milk, Sour, 282
      Orange, 281
      Raspberry Juice, 281
      Salad Entree, 281
      Tarragon, 281
    Fruit, 290
      Additional Combinations, 292
      Apple, Cooked, 292
        and Cranberry, 291
        and Pineapple, 290
      Currant and Red Raspberry, 291
      Grape Fruit and Celery, 292
      Love Apple, 292
      Mint, 291
      Nut and Banana, 291
      Oriental, 292
      Peach, 292
      Sweet Fruit and Cocoanut, 292
    True Meat, 284
      Additional Combinations, 286
      Bean, Green French and Cucumber, 284
      Cottage Cheese and Pear, 286
        and Radish, 285
      Helianthus (Sunflower) Mayonnaise, 285
      Legume, Novel, 284
        Roses, 285
      Marguerite, 285
      Nut Meat, Hot, 284
      Trumese and Celery, 284
    Vegetable, 286
      Additional Combinations, 289
      _a la Russe_, 287
      Asparagus Mayonnaise, 288
      Bean, String, and Celery, 288
      Beet and Olive, 288
      Cauliflower, 287
      Cucumber and Onion, 288
      Dominion, or French Sam’s, 287
      English, 287
      Lavender, or Pink, 286
      Pink No. 2, 287
      Slaw, Cold, 287
        Hot, 287
      Snow, Cabbage, 286
      Tomato, Stuffed, 289
  =Sandwiches=, 465
    _a la Salade_, 471
    Bread and Butter, English, 472
    Canapes, 470
      Cottage Cheese, 471
      Indian, 470
      Mushroom, 470
      Russian, 471
      Trumese and Egg, 470
    Fillings for, 466-470
    Tomato, Sister Starr’s, 471
    Trumese, non-starch, 472
    Variegated, 472
  =Soups=, 74
    =Bisques=, 92
      Of Corn, 92
        Cucumber, 92
        Spinach, 94
      Milk and Tomato, 93
        With Eggs, 93
      Nut and Tomato, 94
    =Chowders=, 94
      Celery, Onion and Corn, 97
      Corn and Carrot, 95
      Nut, 95
      Oyster Plant and Another, 96, 97
      Potato and Onion or Celery, 96
      Rice and Vegetable, 97
      Royal Vegetable, 97
      Seashore, 94
      String Beans and Celery, 97
      Tomato Cream, 96
    =Cream and Milk=, 84
    Cream of Asparagus, 85
      Bean, 85
      Beans, String, 87
      Bouillon, 85
      Cabbage or Celery, and Tomato, 85
      Carrot, 85
      Celery, 86
      Chestnut, 86
      Corn, 86
      Corn, Dried, 86
      Corn, Dried, and Carrot, 86
      Corn and Celery, 87
      Corn and Peas, 87
      Leek, 86
      Lentil, 86
      Onion, 87
      Oyster Plant, 87
      Peas, Dry, 87
      Peas, Green or Canned, 89
      Potato, or Sweet Potato, 87
      Rice, 88
      Spinach, 87
      Succotash, 87
      Tomato, and Another, 89
    =Miscellaneous Cream and Milk=
      Brazil Nut, 90
      Broths, Cream, 89
      Cabbage, Milk Stew of, 91
      Mayflower, 91
      Okra, with Cream, 88
      Oyster Bay, 91
        Plant and Celery, 92
          and Corn, 92
        Cream Stew of, 92
        Milk Stew of, 92
      Paris Onion, 88
      Peas Pods, Soup of, 88
        Split, 88
        and Tomato, 89
      Potato, Sister Cooley’s Brown, 90
        Sliced, 90
      Tomato Cream, 89
      Vegetable, Milk, 90
    =Fruit=, 100
      Blueberry and Cocoanut, 102
      Cherry, 101
      Grape Juice Cream, 102
      Raisin and Almond Broth, 102
      Scandinavian, 101
      Sea Moss, 101
      Strawberry and Pineapple, 100
    =Garnishes and Accompaniments=, 102
      Balls, 105
        Cream, 104
        Egg, 105
      Croutons, 102
      Dice Royale, 103
      Dumplings, 107
      Eggs, Spun, 106
      Miscellaneous, 103
      Noodles, 107
        Cream, 108
      Paste, Royal, 105
      Thickening for Potato Soup, 106
      Timbales, Rice, 106
    =Our Famous Soups=, 99
    =Purées=, 97
      Almond, 97
      Of Potatoes, 98
        Sago, 98
      Split Peas, 98
    =Suggestions=, 75
    =Water=, 76
      Bean, 83
        Unstrained, 83
      Bouillon, Cereal, 78
        Nut, 76
      Broths, Legume, 79
        Tomato, 79
      Cabbage and Tomato, 80
      Celery and Tomato, 80
      Consomme, Vegetable, 77
      Egg, 79
      French, Nut, 79
      Gumbo, Nut, 82
      Mother’s, 82
      Nut and Barley, 80
      Onion, 80
      Peas, Chick, 83
        Split and Onion, 81
      Potato with Onion or Celery, 81
      Rice, Savory, 80
      Stock, Dark, 78
        Vegetable, 78
        White, 77
      Tampa Bay, 82
      Tomato, 82
      Vegetable, No. 1, 2, 3, 81
  =Stuffings and Dressings=, 221
    Black Walnut and Potato, 222
    Celery, 222
    Chestnut, 222
    Danish, 221
    Nut and Raisin, 222
    Onion and Parsley, 222
    Savory, 221
    Simple, 221
    Vegetable, 222
  =Vegetables=, 237
    Artichokes, Globe, 238
      Jerusalem, 238
    Asparagus, 239
      Cream or Butter, 240
      Drawn Butter, 240
      Egg Cream Sauce, 240
      _Sauce Americaine_, 240
    Beans, String, Cream, 240
      Nut and Tomato Bisque Sauce, 241
      Shelled, Green, 241
      Flowering, Green, 241
    Beets, 242
      Pickled, 242
    Broccoli, 242
    Brussels Sprouts, 243
    Cabbage, Boiled, Plain, 243
      and Corn, 244
      In Cream or My Mother’s, 243
      With Nuts and Raisins, 244
      Sour, 244
      Sweet Sour, 244
      In Tomato, 244
    Carrots, 244
      _a la_ Washington, 245
      and Beets, 246
        Corn, 246
      Minced, 245
      and Onions, 246
        Peas, 245
      Pickled, 245
      Stewed, 245
      and String Beans, 245
        Succotash, 245
    Cauliflower, 246
    Celery, Mint Sauce, 247
      Raw, 247
      Stewed, 247
    Celery, In Tomato, 248
    Chard, Swiss, 248
    Corn, Baked, 250
        In Husks, 249
      Boiled, 249
        In Husks, 249
      On the Cob, 248
      Dried, 250
      Green, 248
      Roasted, 250
      Slitter, 249
      Steamed, 249
        In Husks, 249
      Stewed, 250
        In Milk, 250
    Cucumbers, 251
      au Naturel, 251
      Sliced, 251
      Stewed, 252
    Egg Plant, 252
      In Batter, 252
    Greens, 253
      Kale, 254
    Okra, Sliced, Stewed, 254
      Stewed whole, 254
    Onions, Baked, 255
      Boiled, 255
      Raw, 255
      Stewed, 255
    Oyster Plant, 256
      with Celery or Corn, 257
        Drawn Butter Sauce, 257
      Stewed or Creamed, 256
    Parsley, 257
    Parsnips, 257
      Boiled, 257
      Browned, 258
      Fricassee of, 258
      Mashed, 258
      Stewed, 258
    Peas, 258
      With Corn, 259
      German Way, 259
      Melting Sugar, 259
      With New Potatoes, 259
      Parisian Style, 259
      Stewed, 258
    Poke Shoots, 254
    Potatoes, 259
      Baked, 260
      Boiled Early, 261
        Late or Winter, 261
      Browned Mashed Slices, 264
      Cakes, 263
      Creamed Stewed, 262
        Warmed Over, 262
        Water, 262
      Hashed Browned, 263
        Creamed, 263
      Irish Way, 261
      In Jackets, 261
      Mashed, 263
      New, Small, 262
      Parisian, Improved, 263
      Puree, 264
      Steamed, 262
      Sweet, Baked, 264
        Boiled, 264
        Mashed, 264
    =Preserving=
      Corn in Brine, 73
      Beans, String, in Brine, 73
      To Can, 69
        Asparagus, 70
          In Full Lengths, 70
        Beans, Shelled, 70
          String, 70
        Beets, 71
        Corn, 71
        Greens, 70
        Mushrooms, 71
        Okra, 71
        Peas, 71
      To Dry, 72
        Beans, Shelled, 72
          String, 72
        Corn, 72
        Mushrooms, 72
    Pumpkin, Baked, 265
        Individual, 265
      Mashed, 265
    Radishes, 265
    Spinach, 265
      With Cream, 266
    Squash, Summer, 266
        Baked, Ripe, 266
        With Corn, 266
      Winter, 266
        Baked, Mashed, 267
          Virginia Way, 267
        Mashed, 267
    Starchless, 270
    and Sugarless, 270
    Suggestions, 237
    Tomatoes, 267
      Broiled, 269
      Puree, 269
      Raw, 268
      Steamed, 268
      Stewed, 268
    Turnips, 269
      Boiled, 269
      Mashed, 270
    Vegetable Stew, 270




[Illustration: THE “SAVORY” DOUBLE BOILER]




ERRATA


The sauce number 72 given for Peanut and Rice Croquettes (page 152),
and for Mashed Beans (page 186), should be 75.




Transcriber’s Notes.

Punctuation has been standardised and simple typographical errors have
been repaired. Hyphenation and obsolete/variant spelling have been
preserved as printed. Bold text is surrounded by =equals signs=.

The corrections noted in the book’s Errata have been applied to the
text; the Errata section itself has been moved from after the Table of
Contents to the end of the book.

Commas were printed as periods in the series of sauces on pages 159,
183, and 190 and have been changed to match similar series.

The following changes have also been made:

  Page 6: “Breads--Unleavened, Without Chemicals”
  for “Breads--Unleaved, Without Chemicals”

  Page 11: “time and strength in using.”
  [added period]

  Page 21: “Sometimes leave them whole”
  for “Sometimes leaves them whole”

  Page 38: “dip them, one at a time”
  for “dip them, one at a a time”

  Page 39: “grapes and juice do not agree with every one.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 42: “the several divisions have been carefully made”
  for “the several divisions heve been carefully made”

  Page 44: “The use of pineapple in diphtheria”
  for “The use of pineapple in diptheria”

  Page 55: “Gooseberries, green”
  for “Gooseberrries, green”

  Page 57: “covers down if necessary”
  for “covers down if neccessary”

  Page 63: “the meringue, may be made with”
  for “the meringue, may be made wit”

  Page 65: “Boil 5 m.; add ¾ pt. sugar”
  [added period]

  Page 78: “2½ qts. boiling water.”
  [added period]

  Page 79: “browned flour may be used.”
  [added period]

  Page 80: “Heat to boiling, add rice, onion,”
  [added comma]

  Page 84: “among the French in Switzerland.”
  for “among the French in switzerland.”

  Page 92: “When boiling, thicken and add corn”
  for “when boiling, thicken and add corn”

  Page 92: “and the water thickened with flour.”
  for “and the water thickened with flour;”

  Page 97: “The proportion of water may be varied.”
  [added period]

  Page 104: “stirring until smooth.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 115: “Cook celery and mushrooms”
  for “Cook celery and mushroons”

  Page 121: “(or ½ cream and ½ oyster liquor)”
  [added closing parenthesis]

  Page 126: “3 cups rich consommé”
  for “3 cups rich consomme”

  Page 141: “They are at their best unground, as”
  for “They are at their best unground, as as”

  Page 146: “Keep in glass jars”
  for “keep in glass jars”

  Page 149: “or butternuts, hazelnuts, and hickory nuts”
  [added comma]

  Page 151: “may be substituted for potato”
  for “may be substituted for pototo”

  Page 156: “calculate the quantity, and”
  for “calculate the quantity, and and”

  Page 164: “added a little cream,”
  [added comma]

  Page 166: “bake in a rather hot oven 1-1¼ hour.”
  [added period]

  Page 170: “the cuttings may be chopped”
  for “the cuttings may chopped”

  Page 172: “are a delicate brown.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 175: ““nutmete”, “nutcysa””
  [added comma]

  Page 178: “Heat in moderate oven.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 187: “red and white kidney beans”
  for “red and and white kidney beans”

  Page 188: “sprinkle with crumbs”
  for “sprinkle with with crumbs”

  Page 190: “Substitute chick peas for lentils”
  for “Subtitute chick peas for lentils”

  Page 195: ““Our common split pea”
  [added opening quotation mark]

  Page 199: “whatever you wish to serve them on.)”
  [added closing parenthesis]

  Page 219: “½ cup consommé or milk”
  for “½ cup consomme or milk”

  Page 219: “1½ cup water (part mushroom liquor if any)”
  [added closing parenthesis]

  Page 225: “1 pt. consommé”
  for “1 pt. consomme”

  Page 226: “1 tablespn. flour”
  for “1 tablespn. our”

  Page 228: “liquid in drawn butter”
  for “liquid n drawn butter”

  Page 243: “15-30 m., according to age”
  [added period]

  Page 252: “and boil 5 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 253: “cabbage sprouts, young beet tops”
  [added comma]

  Page 271: “10-20 m., drain, serve plain”
  [added period]

  Page 274: “Wipe it dry before cutting”
  for “wipe it dry before cutting”

  Page 282: “Whip cream, sugar and salt together”
  [added comma]

  Page 285: “radish lilies on lettuce”
  for “radish lilies n lettuce”

  Page 285: “fill the center with green mayonnaise”
  for “fill the enter with green mayonnaise”

  Page 289: “grated cucumbers”
  for “grated cucmbers”

  Page 289: “the large end of boiled carrots.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 301: “(1 cup grape juice and 1½ cup water if convenient)”
  [added closing parenthesis]

  Page 307: “in double boiler for 20 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 311: “in very slow oven for 40 m.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 312: “turn with silver fork,”
  [added comma]

  Page 316: “cook 5 m.; remove from fire”
  [added period]

  Page 317: “boil 3-5 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 317: “or if sweet with cream.”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 318: “boil 5 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 321: “Beat eggs for 3 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 326: ““o.” or “p.””
  [added period]

  Page 328: “Cook raisins 20 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 329: “and ½ cup water 5 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 332: “2 tablespns. sugar”
  [added period]

  Page 340: “1 tablespn. lemon juice”
  [changed comma to period]

  Page 344: “Simmer all together 10-15 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 356: “with or without the coriander”
  for “with or without the coriandar”

  Page 357: “Raisin Meringue”
  for “Raisin Merangue”

  Page 385: “place for 15-20 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 398: “spread quickly”
  for “spreadly quickly”

  Page 398: “beat for 20 m.”
  [added period]

  Page 400: “Flavor sugar with oil of orange”
  for “Flavor sugar wth oil of orange”

  Page 413: “1 part to 4½ or 5”
  [added "or"]

  Page 414: “onion the same as pilau,”
  [changed period to comma]

  Page 416: “When thoroughly dried”
  for “When throughly dried”

  Page 423: “tomato also may be added”
  for “tomato also may be be added”

  Page 431: “or sugar may be omitted”
  for “or sugar may may be omitted”

  Page 445: “the air we breathe,” for it is”
  for “the air we breathe.” for it is”

  Page 463: “kneading it very stiff.”
  [added period]

  Page 465: “sharp pointed Japanese toothpicks.”
  [added period]

  Page 484: “To Make a Cereal Drink”
  for “To Make a Cerial Drink”

  Page 494: “all the food intended for”
  for “all the food intended or”

  Page 494: “should be eaten in order”
  for “should be eaten in in order”

  Page 505: “no attractions compared”
  for “no attractions campared”

  Page 506: “Beadles, 443”
  [added comma]

  Page 506: “Crumb, 444”
  [changed period to comma]






End of Project Gutenberg's The Laurel Health Cookery, by Evora Bucknum Perkins

